Title: A note on defeating piracy
Date: 2012-01-19 08:00
Author: chriskrycho
Category: Posts
Tags: new media, piracy, public policy
Slug: a-note-on-defeating-piracy

*The following is adapted and expanded from some comments I left on
[Cranach: The Blog of Veith][]'s [post][] on Wikipedia going dark
yesterday.*

As many others have pointed out, there are many better solutions to
piracy than those proposed by PIPA and SOPA. One of these solutions is
to address the root issues of much of the piracy that goes on: the
absolutely backwards systems that the content-publishers themselves have
created, systems that inconvenience only the people who actually care
about copyright.<!--more--> The only people who respect the inane
digital rights management systems present on most DVDs, Blu-rays, and
CDs are people who already care about copyright laws. The people who
intend to pirate *will do so*. The real question is whether a media
publisher's policies make it so difficult to use the content one has
purchased that piracy begins to appear a reasonable alternative.

Consider: music piracy dropped *significantly* after the launch of the
iTunes store. Why? Because people could get the music they wanted in
digital form easily and inexpensively. It didn't need to be free; it
just needed to be convenient, relatively inexpensive, and follow the
distribution model - digital downloads - that now ruled the day. The
same is true of movies. Digital copy protection on disks, a half dozen
*unskippable* commercials before the content actually plays, etc...
these don't actually stop pirates or significantly increase the profits
of the publishers, but they *do* frustrate people to the point that many
people are tempted to "pirate" content they would not otherwise. Why in
the world should I not be able to copy a movie I purchased from the DVD
to my computer? Yet that is the case with most video content out there.
(One number nobody on the content side wants to publish or even think
about is this: how many "pirated" copies are just people downloading a
copy of something they already own because they don't want to have to
deal with the enormous hassles involved in dealing with the copy they do
own? The number is higher than you'd think.)

So one of the best ways to defeat piracy - and publishers who have
embraced this mentality have already reaped the rewards - is to make
content relatively inexpensive and readily available in the channels
people want. If I buy a Blu-ray, give me the digital copy. Some
publishers have started doing this, but most of them have *still*
imposed absurd restrictions that make it difficult to access that
content, including arcane registration and management systems, time
limits on the availability of the digital download, etc. Take that away,
and people will see far more value in your product. Leave it there, and
people are far more likely to think, "Look, I already bought this. I'm
just going to download it from somewhere that's less of a hassle."

Similarly, many content producers are trying frantically to limit access
to their content - but this again has the exact opposite effect
intended. When a major broadcast network delays the availability of its
shows on its website for a week, piracy skyrockets. They want to push
people to watch the show on their televisions when it airs - but this is
no longer how people interact with content. When, instead, the content
is readily available immediately, piracy drops. People don't want to
pirate, generally speaking. They just want to watch the content - so
give it to them!

Look: I'll pay for Hulu Plus *if* I can get the content I want on it.
That money then goes back to the people making it. But I'm not going to
pay for it if you refuse to publish your content there because you can't
imagine most of your money on a TV show not coming from DVD sales. But
wait - ten years ago, you didn't want to sell DVDs because you thought
you'd never make money on them, and you worried that people would watch
them instead of watching whatever your current show on television is. In
another decade, digital distribution is going to be far and away the
primary means by which people get their content. The only question is
who will be profiting from those downloads.

The *reality* is that old ways of protecting content are dead. Digital
distribution is in. Your content *will* be distributed digitally. If you
don't do it, someone else will - they'll digitize it, and they'll make
it available for others. The best way to make money off your product is
to beat them to the punch. Get your product out there, and make it easy
for people to get to. Then ask them to pay a bit so you can keep giving
it to them. Guess what? They will!

*For more reading, see "[SOPA, Internet regulation, and the economics of
piracy][]" at [Ars Technica][].*

  [Cranach: The Blog of Veith]: http://www.geneveith.com/
  [post]: http://www.geneveith.com/2012/01/18/wikipedia-is-on-strike-today/
    "Wikipedia is on strike today"
  [SOPA, Internet regulation, and the economics of piracy]: http://arstechnica.com/tech-policy/news/2012/01/internet-regulation-and-the-economics-of-piracy.ars
  [Ars Technica]: http://arstechnica.com/
