Title: A Plea for Open Data
Date: 2012-03-02 14:16
Author: chriskrycho
Category: Posts
Tags: development, open data, secrecy
Slug: a-plea-for-open-data

One of my current side projects involves some database work for a client
in an academic context. There is an enormous trove of data being
collected by the project, but the local administrators refuse to publish
the data on the internet themselves. This despite the fact that it's
already being published to their academic intranet. This despite the
fact that they're willing (with some persuasion) to pay an outside
contractor to develop a means of displaying the data for all the public
to use.

I'm not sure what's driving this sort of recalcitrant refusal to share
the data, but I can't see there being any *good* reason. <!--more-->

There are plenty of reasons to keep secrets. If you're developing a new
product and don't want your competitors getting a drop on you, or are
close to making a breakthrough that could make you enormous amounts of
money, it may well be in your best interests to keep your work behind
closed doors. Whatever one thinks of Apple and its sometimes hamhanded
approach to dealing with leaks, the company at least has a good reason
for preferring secrecy; it's part of its marketing scheme and it helps
prevent copies from flooding the market too quickly. (Consider how long
it took to get a real competitor to the iPad to market, and you'll
quickly grasp the power of secrecy.)

If you're collecting data for a scientific endeavor, though, I can't see
the benefits unless you're going to be applying for a patent. The
project I'm working on is nothing like that. It's not developing
technology; it's recording data - data that is widely useful and
*ultimately available*. We just have to jump through hoops first.

While there is real utility in the database work I'm doing on this
project, it would be far more useful for the data to be publicly
available to *everyone* as soon as it was ready to be published. I'm
creating a number of ways to access and display the data, but what if
someone thinks of a novel way to recombine the data themselves? They can
certainly use various combinations of reports my tool will generate for
them. Or, if the data were freely available to them, they could remix it
however they liked, without the constraints of the particular reports my
tool is supposed to generate.

This ties into a broader picture culturally: the more openly available
any kind of information is, the more readily people can reuse it,
including for purposes the creator may never have imagined. The public
availability of the data is a step in the right direction - I'm glad
that the techs in the academic program I'm working for recognize that
much at least. However, really open data goes further: it makes all the
data *as available as it can be*. A truly open data approach might still
supply some tools, like the ones I'm building, to make managing the data
easier for the general use case. However, it would also leave the door
open for direct access to the baseline data, getting out of the way of
someone who conceives of a novel use for the information.

People my age and younger are seeing cultural media (songs, movies,
etc.) not so much as fixed artifacts but rather as something to be
adapted to new uses and presentations. This is part of what has caused
such tumult in old media industries used to protecting their content
from being reused in any way. A few particularly forward thinking
artists have recognized that, with the right constraints, the remix
culture can be the best kind of advertising - *free*. A kind word asking
for credit to be given where credit is due and not to charge for remix
work is nearly always honored.

The same is true of data, where oftentimes there is nothing to protect -
just old habits of keeping things under wraps. The more that
universities and researches push their data out for the rest of the
world to use, the more that data can accomplish. A single team of
researchers will always have limited time and resources, not to mention
biases in their aims for the data. But another group of researchers may
find that data allows them to do complimentary work at lower cost - a
benefit to all of us. Toss in the sorts of contributions that hobbyists
sometimes make, especially in the tech industry with its history of
open-source innovation, and open data is a recipe for success - not only
your own success, but also everyone else's success.
