Title: Dear Avid: Please Sell Sibelius
Date: 2012-08-23 07:45
Author: chriskrycho
Category: Posts
Tags: Avid, Ben and Jonathan Finn, best practices, customer service, SaveSibelius, Sibelius
Slug: dear-avid-please-sell-sibelius

Dear Avid,^[1][]^

Monday, after noting that my copy of Sibelius 5 would not install on my
new MacBook Pro - no surprise, it is after all 5-year-old software - I
looked for some solutions online. It became clear that I wouldn't be
able to get it going, so I started looking at upgrading to Sibelius 7,
about which I've heard many good things. Upgrading was an easy decision:
I've had nothing but good experiences with Sibelius since I bought a
copy of Sibelius 3 back in 2004.

Along the way, I stumbled on [this blog post][] by Daniel Spreadbury.
Curious what he meant by “the recent news about Avid’s corporate
restructuring”, I followed the link.

By now, I'm sure you can see [where this is going][]: like many other
long-time Sibelius users, I'm more than a bit disgruntled by the news.
<!--more-->Given that Sibelius has been an essential part of my musical
creative process for nearly a decade now - a length of time dwarfed by
others' usage, but a quite substantial fraction of my own life - I was
extremely disheartened to hear that you were disbanding the Sibelius
development team in the interest of cost cutting.

To put it mildly, I think this a very poor decision. In cutting the
development team, you are making it clear that you are unwilling to
continue investing in the people who have made this such an excellent
product. Indeed, your willingness to let go the very staff responsible
for the creation and development of one of your more consistently
profitable products suggests that you have only short-term profits in
mind and are not, in fact, dedicated to the future success of the
product – whatever your press releases may say.

Unfortunately for you and your shareholders, this strategy is almost
certainly doomed to failure in the long-term. In the short-term, you
will see increased profits from this move. You will not have to pay the
salaries of these developers, and in outsourcing the development to
Kiev, you will retain the ability to produce at least some code – the
quality of such code is of course doubtful. In the long run, however,
the outlook for Sibelius is not exactly good.

First, the software's current dominance across Hollywood, university
music programs, and private composer use is not easily sustained. It is
the result of years of diligent effort by the development team to keep
advancing the tool and to provide the best customer support in the
field. You may be able to keep the product afloat, but you've already
dismissed the most important part of its success: the people who created
it, know it best, and have the creative vision to keep advancing it year
after year. That combination of passion, knowledge, and vision is
irreplaceable, and *that* is what has made Sibelius great.

Second, please understand that in making this move, you are alienating
your core customer base – people you cannot afford to lose. These are
the people who promote your product for you, who advocate for it to
others, who encourage them to buy it over Finale or any of the other
music scoring on the market. If you lose these enthusiasts, you are
almost certain to lose many other customers, as well. Excited,
knowledgeable user proponents are essential for the success of any
software – far more effective than any other kind of marketing – and
your decisions are clearly not in the best interest of these customers.

Rather, your actions demonstrate that you do not value your product, you
do not value the people who are your customers, and you do not value
your employees. This, in turn, means that you are not the kind of
company I am interested in supporting. Avid is now a company I will tell
everyone I know to avoid – not out of malice, but simply because I would
rather not see money flow to a company with such a poor attitude toward
its employees, its products, and its customers.

Of course, it is easy to dismiss this letter as insignificant. I am just
one customer, after all. And those others like me who are disappointed
are still but a fraction of your customer base. Moreover, Sibelius is
not your primary product; it's just a supplement to your profits.

However, as more and more of your customers come to share these
conclusions about Avid, it will impact bottom line, and not in a way you
like. Your poor treatment of Sibelius means that discerning customers
will be slow to trust your promises about other products they rely on,
including Pro Tools. Your poor treatment of the developers behind
Sibelius means those same discerning customers will take their business
to companies who value their employees more than you apparently do.

There is, however, a way out. It won't maximize your profits in the
short term. It will, however, earn you the good will of the Sibelius
community.

Sell Sibelius. It is [public knowledge][] that the Finn brothers^[2][]^
have offered at least twice to purchase the software back from you, in
the dual interests of maintaining the momentum of the software and of
taking care of the employees you have let go. Selling it back to them is
the right move – for your customers, for the product, for the
developers, and most importantly, for Avid. The goodwill of your
customer base and the trust of your own employees are not small things
in the long run.

As a long-time user of Sibelius, one of its many ardent fans, a frequent
proselytizer, one of the many who have the highest respect for the
Sibelius development team, please do the right thing by your customers
and your former employees. You have [claimed][] to care about the
Sibelius community. Prove it. Show that you are interested in the best
outcome for your customers and in the highest quality of products. That
is the surest route to earning the trust of your customers and your
employees – and therefore, the surest route to long-term, sustainable
profitability.

Regards,

Chris Krycho

<section class="footnotes">

* * * * *

1.  I am sending this letter to each of the Avid executives for whom I
    have contact information. If you share my sentiments about the
    treatment of the developers behind Sibelius, I suggest you contact
    them as well.[↩][]

2.  Ben and Jonathan Finn were the original developers of Sibelius and
    the owners of the company until they sold it to Avid in 2006.[↩][3]

</section>

  [1]: #fn1
  [this blog post]: http://www.sibeliusblog.com/news/upgrade-to-sibelius-7-and-save-25/
  [where this is going]: http://www.chriskrycho.com/web/posts/dont-sell-out/
    "Don't Sell (Out)"
  [public knowledge]: http://www.artsjournal.com/slippeddisc/2012/07/sibelius-closure-founders-buyback-offer-rebuffed.html
    "Sibelius closure: inventors' buyback offer rebuffed"
  [2]: #fn2
  [claimed]: http://community.avid.com/blogs/avid/archive/2012/07/23/avids-commitment-to-sibelius.aspx
    "Avid's Commitment to Sibelius @ community.avid.com blog"
  [↩]: #fnref1
  [3]: #fnref2
