Title: Don't Sell (Out)
Date: 2012-08-21 23:27
Author: chriskrycho
Category: Posts
Tags: acquisitions, Avid, customer service, development, jerk moves, Sibelius
Slug: dont-sell-out

Today, it came to my attention that [Avid][], maker of various audio and
video processing tools – tools you've heard of if you're in those
industries, high profile names like Pro Tools - has closed down the main
office responsible for developing Sibelius and sourced the development
to a team in the Ukraine.

Nothing against the Ukrainians, but shutting down the London development
office responsible for nearly two decades and replacing it with a team a
third its size does not bode well for future development.

[![Box art for Sibelius 7][]][]

This came out in as underhanded a way as possible, with the sorts of PR
doublespeak and carefully prepared press releases I've come to expect
from large corporations. Avid's statements indicated that they were
consolidating their engineering efforts in order to save money. Since
Sibelius seems to be quite profitable, it's clear that Avid is choosing
to bleed the product to support its other goals. This move, in other
words, reeks of bean-counting trumping any love of product or any real
concern for the customers that have invested in Sibelius over the last
several decades - invested more than money. <!--more-->

If Avid actually cared about its own employees or about the software,
the company would sell Sibelius back to its founders, Ben and Jonathan
Finn, who have offered *twice* to buy the company back, in order to keep
the software going and its developers employed. Avid will have none of
it. They want the profits with none of the investment.^[1][]^

This sort of things is increasingly common in the tech industry, and
it's tragic. A large corporation will buy out a smaller one for the
talent, or for the profitable software which it then runs into the
ground by mismanagement, or just to stamp out possible competition with
its own offerings. The market is poorer for it, the original developers
watch their vision founder on the hard rocks of corporate bureaucracy,
and the users lose out in the end.^[2][]^

There's a takeaway here for developers. If you care about your product
at all – and I'm assuming you do, because if you're just in it for the
money, you're probably not making the kind of product I buy anyway
– then don't sell. The moment you sell your company, no matter how good
the sum, you've sold out. I've seen it happen too many times to believe
otherwise.^[3][]^

Truth be told, I don't blame you. Not really. It's hard to turn down
millions of dollars as a reward for your hard work. The deal may look
quite sweet up front, especially when the buyers have every reason to
persuade they'll take good care of your baby. But they won't. They don't
love your creation like you do; in some sense, they can't. They haven't
poured the hours of effort into it that you have; they don't understand
the beautiful intricacies that you do; they don't have the passion that
drove you to create it in the first place.

Your product may not wither on the vine the first month or year after
it's bought, but the time will come when someone high up the food chain
is pushing numbers around – someone who loves numbers but doesn't love
product, and sad to say but there are a lot of those giving the quality
MBAs a bad name – and your product will suddenly face the chopping
block. Either it will die, or its developers will be forced to make
compromises they would never have made under better leadership, or the
product will simply be pushed into a niche it was never meant for.
^[4][]^ If you sold it, you're out of luck. Maybe you'll be able to
persuade the company to sell it back to you, but more likely they'll
take the profits until they run the product into the ground.

So don't sell out – which is to say, don't sell. Don't take the money
they'll hand you if you care about the product you've made, no matter
how tempting. I, your user, need you to hold on to the vision. If you're
ready to step aside, that's okay – but find someone to replace you who
shares your love of the product and your vision for the niche it fills
in the market. You owe that to the users who have gotten you where you
are. We want nothing more than to keep supporting you as you make the
great products we love.^[5][]^

<section class="footnotes">

* * * * *

1.  The [post][] is only available to subscribers, so here's the text of
    Ben and Jonathan Finn's comments:[↩][]

    > We were very concerned to hear earlier this month that Avid is
    > terminating the jobs of the Sibelius development team in London
    > and handing the software over to other programmers, apparently to
    > cut costs. As far as we know, Sibelius continues to be extremely
    > successful, so this cost-cutting is a response to financial
    > problems elsewhere in Avid, not with Sibelius itself.
    >
    > Ever since then we have been quietly trying to do everything we
    > can to change this situation, including twice offering to buy
    > Sibelius back from Avid. However, Avid has declined. While they
    > haven’t given a reason, we assume that Sibelius is a substantial
    > source of profits to them, so they don’t want to sell it to
    > anyone.
    >
    > We naturally feel very sad about this treatment of our friends and
    > colleagues who have been key to making Sibelius a success, and who
    > have become the world experts in this specialized field. We are
    > also very grateful to the many Sibelius users who have expressed
    > their concern and support; though at this point, it seems unlikely
    > that any protests will change Avid’s mind.
    >
    > We hope Sibelius nonetheless continues to be the world’s most
    > successful music notation software.
    >
    > Ben & Jonathan Finn Sibelius founders

2.  So will the big company that makes this move in the end. This is a
    surefire way to lose your customers. More on that tomorrow in the
    form of an open letter to the folks at Avid – when I'm less angry
    and can write more rationally.[↩][6]

3.  I've seen some folks suggesting that the solution here is open
    source. That sounds nice in theory, but the reality is that I've
    never seen an open source product that could compete with a closed
    source product in the areas that matter for consumer software. Linux
    is great, but there's a reason the "year of the Linux desktop" is
    permanently mythical. If you want really top-notch software, you'll
    pay for it, because people have to eat. There's more to say about
    this, but that's for another post.[↩][7]

4.  This is the third time I've been bitten by this in the last six
    months. It's getting old. I saw it with [<cite>Mass Effect
    3</cite>][], which bore the clear imprint of corporate takeover
    killing company vision and culture with EA taking over Bioware a few
    years ago. I saw it with [Sparrow][], which has now abandoned all
    future development on a product lots of Mac and iOS users were
    excited about after its developers were acquired – for talent, not
    product – by Google. And now I've seen it with Sibelius, just a few
    short years after Avid purchased it.[↩][8]

5.  Should Ben or Jonathan Finn happen to read this, understand: I'm not
    criticizing your decision. Hindsight is always 20/20, and I've no
    doubt Avid looked like a good move at the time. I wish you the very
    best of luck in reacquiring Sibelius, and if you do I'll be one of
    your first customers and one of your loudest supporters. And should
    Daniel Spreadbury happen by, know that you have my very highest
    regard and thanks for the support – some of it despite official
    statements that my situation was very much *not* supported – over
    the last couple years.[↩][9]

</section>

  [Avid]: http://www.avid.com/US/
  [Box art for Sibelius 7]: http://www.chriskrycho.com/web/files/2012/08/sibelius-7.jpeg
    "sibelius-7"
  [![Box art for Sibelius 7][]]: http://www.chriskrycho.com/web/files/2012/08/sibelius-7.jpeg
  [1]: #fn1
  [2]: #fn2
  [3]: #fn3
  [4]: #fn4
  [5]: #fn5
  [post]: http://www.sibelius.com/cgi-bin/helpcenter/chat/chat.pl?com=thread&start=602525&groupid=3
  [↩]: #fnref1
  [6]: #fnref2
  [7]: #fnref3
  [<cite>Mass Effect 3</cite>]: http://www.chriskrycho.com/art/reflections/mass-effect-3-and-art-as-dialectic/
    "Mass Effect 3 and Art as Dialectic"
  [Sparrow]: http://pandodaily.com/2012/07/20/why-googles-sparrow-acquisition-just-ruined-my-morning/
    "Why Google's Sparrow Acquisition Just Ruined My Morning"
  [8]: #fnref4
  [9]: #fnref5
