Title: iTunes Radio is a Gamechanger
Date: 2013-09-30 20:50
Author: chriskrycho
Category: Posts
Tags: iTunes, music
Slug: itunes-radio-gamechanger

One of the new features Apple launched with iOS7 was iTunes Radio,
available not only to iPhone and iPad users but also to anyone who uses
iTunes on Windows or OS X. While the service got some attention back
when it was announced alongside iOS7 early in the summer, it has
received surprisingly little focus since then.

Surprisingly, I say, because I've been using it every day since it went
public a week and a half ago, and it is without question the single best
internet radio I've ever used. Not "tying with Pandora", not "a little
better than Rdio", but head-and-shoulders above anything else in the
field. Ten days and a few conversations with friends and acquaintances
along, I'm convinced the service is a gamechanger for the music
industry---and possibly a very good one.

It works
--------

The number one reason I think iTunes Radio is going to change the game
is because it just *works*. I have lots of friends who have had good
luck with Pandora over the years, and a fair number of acquaintances who
swear by Spotify for finding new music. Neither of them has ever worked
for me at all. Part of this is my taste in music, which runs toward
neoclassical and film scores---two areas in which all previous internet
radio services' libraries have simply been shallow (and here I'm being
generous). though Another part is that the algorithms have simply failed
me: even in more mainstream music, it's always been a hit and miss
experience, with the services often surfacing things that really didn't
match the other music at all.

iTunes, by contrast, has not only provided quite a bit of good listening
among artists and music I already knew I liked, but has also provided me
with *new* selections I hadn't heard before, but loved. No exaggeration:
I have discovered more new music that I want to buy and add to my
library in the last ten days via iTunes Radio than in a year of Spotify
use or a half decade on Pandora. Moreover, this experience has been
repeated on stations ranging from contemporary classical to one built on
Mumford & Sons. The stations, with the tuning inputs I have supplied,
have consistently surfaced music that was actually what I was looking
for, and introduced me to artists I had not yet heard but really
enjoyed.

iTunes Radio just *works* in a way that other services haven't for me.
Friends and acquaintances with whom I have discussed it have had exactly
the same experience. I am not sure what Apple is doing for their
algorithm---[one friend][] suggests they might be using groups that have
toured together---but it is working, and working well. Add in the
ability to tune a station to switch between "Hits", "Variety", and
"Discovery", and iTunes Radio is just fantastic.

So the first half of the equation is the consumer-facing side of things:
as it stands, I think iTunes Radio is the best service of its kind out
there.^[1][]^

Purchasability
--------------

The other half of the equation is the impact iTunes Radio may have on
musicians. The last decade has been an interesting time for the music
industry: innovation in means of distribution has been enormous, and the
number of artists putting music into the public space has exploded.
However, the result has been that the bottom has fallen out of the
industry. Top performers still make boatloads of money; everyone else is
scrambling to find their feet.

Pandora and Spotify pay artists notoriously low rates---a point that
artists have made time and again, and which I will therefore not
belabor. Airplay on terrestrial radio may be an order of magnitude
harder to come by, but it pays at least that much better, too. In any
case, it's beyond dispute at this point that for all but the biggest
acts, Spotify will be an irrelevant source of revenue.^[2][]^ To date,
streaming services have been at best a way of getting ears on sounds, in
the hope that those ears turn into purchasing---but they rarely do. Why
buy, when you can listen endlessly?

As such, music producers---whether labels or individual artists---have
always struggled with streaming options. They may provide exposure, but
they rarely provide the income necessary to keep making more music.
Pandora and others have offered options to purchase music one likes, but
it has always been a little kludgy. Here, again, iTunes has it nailed.

Purchasing a song I like in iTunes Radio is *one click*. Adding it to a
wish list to buy later, or showing the item in the iTunes Store, is
*two* clicks. All the friction is gone. This is great for music
consumers: it makes owning music we like trivial and immediate. This in
turn means that it is also great for music producers: the chance that
someone actually buys music they heard streaming goes up enormously when
it is this easy.^[3][]^ Purchasability---conversion, in marketing
terms---has always been the missing element in streaming solutions, and
the reasons artists have been so suspicious. Here, it's front and
center, simple and straightforward, and attractive. Like that artist?
Buy her stuff, *right now*.

Conclusion: Gamechanger
-----------------------

So there you have it. iTunes Radio, although it has largely been
overlooked by tech media in the last few weeks, is a gamechanger. In
fact, it may be the biggest gamechanger in music we've seen in the last
few years, because unlike the myriad other streaming services we've
seen, it actually offers the promise of revenue to artists, while
providing real value to consumers. I expect that the next few months
will see iTunes Radio become increasingly popular as word of mouth
spreads that it is just plain *better* than the alternatives. I also
expect that as a result, people will starting buying more music again.
That's a net benefit to everyone. (And if somebody can come out and
compete with Apple on both terms, more power to them: that, too, will
benefit everyone.)

<div class="footnotes">

* * * * *

1.  Worth note that iTunes Radio isn't directly competing with Spotify,
    which offers streaming of arbitrary music as its main selling point.
    It *is* competing directly with Pandora, and with the much-hyped
    discovery elements of both Rdio and Spotify. [↩][]
2.  I ran the numbers a while back on an artist whose music I had given
    *thousands* of plays. Said artist made more when I bought one
    two-disc album for about \$18 than from all those thousands of plays
    combined. [↩][4]
3.  All of this seems like an obvious way to use the iTunes
    platform---so much so that tech observers have been calling for it
    for some time. This in turn raises the question of why it has taken
    so long, especially given that the labels have been willing to make
    deals with platforms like Spotify or Google Play which presumably
    make them much less money. If I had to make a guess, it would be
    that the labels disliked being beholded to the *de facto* monopoly
    iTunes created in the 2000s, and had no interest in repeating that
    scenario.
    </p>
    <p>
    At some point, however, the promise of actual revenue from streaming
    overwhelmed this hesitation, and the labels finally made a deal that
    was to Apple's satisfaction. Barring something surprising happening,
    and assuming artists recognize the value this offers them, I expect
    that the labels will once again find themselves in Apple's
    pocket---and they know it. That's a better outcome than going broke,
    though, and they know that, too. [↩][5]

</div>

  [one friend]: http://stephencarradini.com
  [1]: #fn:1
  [2]: #fn:2
  [3]: #fn:3
  [↩]: #fnref:1
  [4]: #fnref:2
  [5]: #fnref:3
