Title: New Sites Live
Date: 2013-06-15 20:23
Author: chriskrycho
Category: Posts
Tags: PHP, Python, Sarah Warren, Swoon Design, The Accidental Okie, WordPress
Slug: new-sites-live

I launched a couple of sites today, both for my friend Sarah Warren:

-   [The Accidental Okie][] -- her blog, based on an existing WordPress
    theme but with some substantial tweaks to typography, colors,
    backgrounds, etc.
-   [Swoon Designs][] -- a site for her business selling custom
    invitations, stationery, and branding.

Sarah has been blogging as "[The Accidental Okie][]" for a couple years
now, but she spent that whole time on WordPress.com using one of their
upgrades for a hosted site on her own domain. I was unsurprised to hear
she was outgrowing WordPress.com, though -- good themes are hard to come
by and impossible to customize to the extent one would like, so most
people who are serious about blogging end up moving to WordPress.org (if
they stay with the platform). It made sense to do that and get her
professional site launched at the same time.

The design for The Accidental Okie is just a tweak of an existing theme
-- completely new background, header, typography, and color scheme, but
someone else's work otherwise (and generally very good work indeed.)

The design for [Swoon Designs][] was a custom design that Sarah and I
brainstormed up together after looking at a number of other sites she
liked. It's built as a child theme of a popular framework theme, [Reason
2.0][]. That, frankly, is a mistake I won't make again. While the theme
works well (and our final outcome was one with which we're both happy),
it was a chore getting it to work. The original template designer
ignored some fairly basic rules of good design, especially in his CSS,
and it showed rather painfully in making a child theme. In the amount of
time I spent on it, we could have built Sarah a theme from scratch (and
avoided quite a few headaches that came with this setup).

The original is also monstrous as far as these things go -- some 36MB
when compressed. By contrast, the compressed size of *all* the themes
for [chriskrycho.com][], including all the child themes is about 394KB.
Yes, that's two orders of magnitude different. Nothing screams bad
design decisions like a theme that size.

This experience further persuaded me that, while I'll be happy to keep
doing WordPress projects for friends from time to time,^[1][]^ I want to
continue my move away from PHP and WordPress to other parts of the web.
There is simply too much garbage in the PHP world, and I'm increasingly
aware that one of the best ways to be getting better work is to get out
of that world entirely. There are a lot of reasons for that -- not least
the "approachability" factor in PHP, which means a *lot* of
non-programmers are doing it, and especially in the WordPress theme area
-- but moving further the way I already have been toward the Python
community seems like a better plan every day. (Node.js is of course on
my radar as well.) Things that require you to be a good programmer are
better for getting work that pays well (as the market isn't flooded with
people who don't know what they're doing but are willing to work for a
fifth of a reasonable developer rate), and they almost always entail
better kinds of work to be doing anyway.

Speaking of which... now would be the point when I stop writing and go
hammer out some more work on [Step Stool][], which is coming along
nicely (albeit more slowly than I hoped). And of course, I've resigned
myself to the reality that this site will *certainly* be getting a fresh
coat of paint along the way with that project. Can't pass up an
opportunity to redesign the home page, right?

<div class="footnotes">

* * * * *

1.  Just to be incredibly clear: Sarah was a *great* client, and I have
    no qualms about working with her again in the future. Likewise, the
    work I've done *pro bono* for [Mere Orthodoxy][] is just grand as
    far as I'm concerned, and I have another couple friends with similar
    projects potentially in the pipeline. But unless things get really
    desperate, the likelihood that I'll be taking PHP or WordPress jobs
    from random folks on the web is... low at best. [↩][]

</div>

  [The Accidental Okie]: http://theaccidentalokie.com/
  [Swoon Designs]: http://swoondesigns.net/
  [Reason 2.0]: http://themeforest.net/item/reason-wp-smart-responsive-customizable/2274642
  [chriskrycho.com]: http://chriskrycho.com
  [1]: #fn:1
  [Step Stool]: http://step-stool.io
  [Mere Orthodoxy]: http://mereorthodoxy.com
  [↩]: #fnref:1
