Title: Platforms and data: or, why Google+ needs Hootsuite
Date: 2012-05-15 07:00
Author: chriskrycho
Category: Posts
Tags: best practices, data, development, economics, Google, web applications
Slug: platforms-and-data-or-why-google-needs-hootsuite

We're quickly approaching [Google+][]'s first birthday, and the search
giant's social media platform has found a core audience, but it has
never caught on to the extent that Google hoped or the tech media hyped
early on. That core group of tech enthusiasts has certainly put it to
good use, with voices like Tim O'Reilly finding an even broader audience
and a medium that suits him well.

For most of the population, though, Google+ was a novelty that never
went anywhere. <!--more-->Of all my friends, only about three use the
service with any regularity (and by regularity, I don't mean
checking-Facebook-obsessively regularity; I mean a couple times a week).
There are a number of reasons for this, I suspect - the slightly strange
middle ground the service strikes between Twitter and Facebook, the fact
that Facebook is already deeply embedded in most people's lives and
switching costs are concomitantly high, the way it rolled out with
limited (albeit cool) features. But there's another reason I suspect is
a huge part of Google+'s failure to catch on outside of that core
demographic.

One of the great strengths of both Twitter and Facebook - especially
Twitter - is that it makes it easy for other platforms to retrieve and
create content on the network *outside* the network. This is why the
early years of Twitter saw such a plethora of tools to access the
network, from Tweetie to TweetDeck to HootSuite and a thousand others in
between. Especially in a time when Twitter itself wasn't particular
user-friendly, this meant outside developers could take the same data
streams and present them in much more user-friendly ways. A lot of the
innovations that are now central to Twitter itself came out of this
external developer community (just as many of the conventions that drive
Twitter conversation arose from the community of users - the ubiquitous
"retweet" being the most prominent example).

Google+ doesn't have this. Neither does Facebook, of course, at least to
the same extent - but Facebook still makes it easy to pull in the News
Feed... and Google+ doesn't have Facebook's lock-in of 900 million
users. So it is to Google+'s very great detriment that it does not let
external apps have easy access to its data.

The simple truth is: I would be far more likely to use Google+ if I
could integrate it with my HootSuite or TweetDeck apps on Android,
rather than *having* to open the platform-specific application. (I
almost never open the Facebook app, and I don't remember the last time I
actually accessed the official Twitter client for Android - maybe
never.) users are accustomed to being able to get and create content in
a place and way that's convenient to them. Google, I'm sure, has a
reason for locking down its access the way it has, but the cost for
Google+ has been high. Without that pre-existing user base (as in the
case of Facebook) or an easily accessible API (as in the case of
Twitter), all it has to bank on is tech enthusiasts' enthusiasm.

That's great, as far as it goes, but it won't get you any pull outside
of that area, and the truth is that tech enthusiasts *already* like
Google and many of them already gave Google+ most of the information it
can now get from "social analytics" in their other interactions with the
search giant. If Google+ wants to grow outside of that niche - if it
wants to be a genuine social hub (and it does: it's just good for
business) - it needs to make its data open and easily accessible. If it
lets me get at Google+ data in my streams on TweetDeck, it *will* grow.
If it doesn't, it will always be stuck in tech geek land.

There's a lesson here for smaller developers, too. Google+ can sort of
get away with this, because Google was already sufficiently large as to
be able to get some leverage just by having a well-designed interface
and banking on its own reputation. You and I don't have that latter
factor going for us, so a decent interface isn't going to do the trick.
If you're going to build a web app and you want it to catch on, you need
to provide a way for users to get at the data. (Optimally, you want that
data to be accessible in as raw and unfiltered way as possible, as I've
written [before][].) This can't be a future feature; it needs to be a
priority from day one as you're developing. What will your API look
like? How will you allow your users to *create value* on your platform,
using your data? The more you open it up, the more uses people will find
for your service, and the more they'll share it with others, and
accordingly the more powerful it will be.

Open platforms with accessible APIs are *the* key to the data side of
successful web application development. Data, it turns out, is the
currency of an information economy. There are other necessary components
in other aspects of application development, but if you don't get data
right it won't matter how pretty your interface is; you are doomed to
languish in obscurity. If you get data right, though, you might just
have a chance of your data going somewhere interesting.

  [Google+]: https://plus.google.com/ "Google Plus"
  [before]: http://www.chriskrycho.com/web/posts/a-plea-for-open-data/
    "A Plea for Open Data"
