Title: The problems with SOPA and PIPA
Date: 2012-01-18 18:06
Author: chriskrycho
Category: Posts
Tags: intellectual property, PIPA, piracy, public policy, SOPA
Slug: problems-with-sopa-pipa

*The following is adapted and expanded from some comments I left on [Dr.
Gene Veith's][] [post][] on Wikipedia going dark today.*

Congress is considering two acts - the House's [Stop Online Piracy
Act][] and the Senate's [Protect Intellectual Property Act (PIPA)][] -
which have as their stated goals the elimination of online piracy. This
is a notable goal, and one I can get behind. The problem is, these acts
do far more than just stop online piracy.<!--more-->

As a result, a broad group of companies and organizations and sites are
protesting these acts today. Wikipedia has gone completely dark. Reddit
has shut down. Google has blacked out their title and linked to a
discussion of the downsides of these acts. Content producers ranging
from tech sites and writers like Ars Technica and Tim O'Reilly to
musicians like Peter Gabriel are deeply opposed to the acts. Why, you
ask, would the people these acts purportedly aim to protect, opposed to
them?

Put plainly, because these acts attack piracy the way one might try to
kill termites... with a nuclear warhead. The amount of power granted to
copyright owners by these acts is vastly out of proportion to the actual
threat posted to them. More than that, the power granted to
rights-holders is mind-bogglingly short on respect for the rights of
anyone *else*.

Let me explain: if, in this post, I linked to a site (for non-piratical
purposes) that also included pirated content (even if that content were
posted by users and not by the site itself), a content-owner could *take
this site down*, with no short-term legal recourse available to me. I'm
not exaggerating here.

I could eventually get my site back up and running, but the burden of
proof would be on me, rather than the accuser. Name another point in our
legal system where the burden of proof is on the accused! This prospect
alone should horrify every sensible person out there.

I'm all in favor of stopping piracy, but content owners should actually
have to make their case in a court, *the same as everyone else in every
other circumstance*. If I publish libel in a paper, you can and should
sue me - but you don't have the right to summarily demand, before a
trial and without having presented any evidence, that all copies of the
paper be burned *and my printing press seized*. You have to actually sue
me and prove it in court. Likewise, a record company can't walk into a
record store and say, "We *believe* you are *encouraging* the illegal
sale of stolen copies of our CDs; we're shutting you down." They have to
go through the existing legal channels. By contrast, under PIPA and SOPA
a rights-holder can block this site from search results, prevent me from
receiving payments via Paypal, Mastercard, Visa, etc., and lock me out
of all advertising channels - and all this without a trial.

Even the existing legal channels (e.g., the Digital Millennium Copyright
Act) are arguably too lenient in terms of the power they grant to
rights-holders - at least one company eventually won their case in court
against the rights-holders but lost so much money to litigation they had
to shut down anyway - but in any case, *there are already legal channels
by which rights-holders can have infringing content taken down.* They
just don't want to have to actually do the legal work.

I'm not anti-business by any means, and as someone who does a fair
amount of creative work on the side, I see the value in protecting
intellectual property. However, I do not *trust* big business not to
abuse power when it's given to them. I don't trust *any* large
institution not to abuse power when it's given to them. The temptation
is simply too great, and human nature too predictable.

Given this, I urge everyone to call their congressmen and -women and
urge them to vote against PIPA and SOPA. The easiest way to get that
contact information for today is simply to go to [Wikipedia][] and enter
your zip code in the form present on the main page. In the future, you
can find contact information for your Representative [here][], and for
your Senators [here][1].

Tomorrow I'll have a note on defeating piracy. For further reading, see
the following:

-   [SOPA Resistance Day Begins at Ars][] - Ars Technica
-   [End Piracy, Not Liberty][] - Google
-   [SOPA and PIPA - Learn more][] - Wikipedia

  [Dr. Gene Veith's]: http://www.geneveith.com/
    "Cranach: The Blog of Veith"
  [post]: http://www.geneveith.com/2012/01/18/wikipedia-is-on-strike-today/
    "Wikipedia is on strike today"
  [Stop Online Piracy Act]: http://www.opencongress.org/bill/112-h3261/show
  [Protect Intellectual Property Act (PIPA)]: http://www.opencongress.org/bill/112-s968/show
  [Wikipedia]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Main_Page
    "English Wikipedia home page"
  [here]: http://www.house.gov/representatives/
    "US House of Representatives - list of representatives"
  [1]: http://www.senate.gov/general/contact_information/senators_cfm.cfm
    "US Senate - list of Senators"
  [SOPA Resistance Day Begins at Ars]: http://arstechnica.com/staff/palatine/2012/01/sopa-resistance-day-begins-at-ars.ars
  [End Piracy, Not Liberty]: https://www.google.com/landing/takeaction/
  [SOPA and PIPA - Learn more]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:SOPA_initiative/Learn_more
