Title: step-stool.io
Date: 2013-05-25 22:44
Author: chriskrycho
Category: Projects
Tags: Cameron Morgan, CoffeeScript, Python, SASS, Step Stool, web design, zepto.js
Slug: step-stool-io-2

As of a couple hours ago, my newest personal project has a website.
**Step Stool**, the static site generator I'm writing in Python, now has
a home at [step-stool.io][].^[1][]^ If you visit the site, you'll see
that, while it looks nice (at least: I think it does), there's not much
to it and most of the links don't go anywhere. The link that *does* go
somewhere tells you that the project for which the website exists
doesn't actually have any functioning code, yet.^[2][]^

![Step Stool][]

(That gorgeous logo? Designed by the absolutely brilliant [Cameron
Morgan][].)

So why is it live? There are a few reasons. First, the whole point of
the project is my having fun with programming. Web design may not be
directly involved in finishing **Step Stool**, but it definitely
scratches the *fun* itch just as effectively. Second, and more
importantly, it's allowed me to get some time in with *other*
technologies I've been interested in for a while - specifically,
[SASS][]. I've been frustrated with all the problems SASS solves in CSS
for a while now, and I've known I wanted to just go ahead and learn it
for a while. I just haven't had a project where it made sense - until
now.<!--more-->

Third, I've never developed a whole project in public before. This whole
thing is open source (I'm using the [MIT License][] because I think it's
one of the most actually *free* licenses^[3][]^), and you can watch the
development as it happens on the [Bitbucket repository][]. Since I'm
developing it that way, I decided I might as well let the website
development be public, too - hilarious missteps in my use of SASS and so
forth included for public amusement. I doubt anyone will particularly
care, but if they do, it's here to see.

Fourth, and perhaps most importantly, it's motivation. Putting the site
up helps me want to get this project done; it's a great big sign that
says, "Somebody is working on this!"^[4][]^ Given the size of the web,
of course, it's mostly a great big sign to *me*, but since that's the
point, I trust it will do its job effectively.

Along similar lines, I'm actually writing the README file first. In
fact, that is the only thing of any substance on the repository at
present. For a project like this, I think [README-driven development][]
is a perfect fit: it's one of the fastest ways to figure out what you
want to do and how you want the pieces to fit together. It's sort of an
Agile way of making some architecture and design decisions right up
front. It also means that, when I'm done, I should actually have at
least some documentation that is in reasonably good shape - the Achilles
heel of most projects like this one, in my experience.

Going forward, I plan to finish the basic framework for the site in the
next couple weeks, including adding some content for the "About" page.
This includes making a substantially different layout for those content
pages, for obvious reasons, as well as getting all the responsive pieces
fitting together nicely so that the site will present decently on phones
and tablets (and ginormous 27″ monitors, for that matter). Along the
way, I'm going to keep working on picking up some of the *other* new
technologies I'm interested in learning. In particular, I intend to
write any and all Javascript for this project in [CoffeeScript][] and
any animations/DOM manipulation/etc. will most likely be accomplished
using [Zepto.js][], an library that is API-compatible with jQuery but
much smaller.

Finally, once I have the static site generator completed, one of the
first projects I'm going to undertake is rebuilding [step-stool.io][] in
Step Stool. Since I'll already have all the CSS, it should be
straightforward, but it'll make a nice demonstration of the non-blog
uses the tool will support. It isn't generated by Python *yet*... but it
will be.

<div class="footnotes">

* * * * *

1.  Fun story: `.io` domains are *expensive*. This ended up being my
    birthday present from Jaimie this year. Yes, I'm that much of a
    nerd. But really: for a static site generator, I don't think you
    could possibly improve on `.io` for a domain. [↩][]
2.  A `setup.py` file with nothing to set up doesn't count. [↩][5]
3.  Unlike the GPL, which is free only for a very bizarre definition of
    the word "free." But that's another post for another day. [↩][6]
4.  The fact that I sunk my birthday present into it is a similarly
    encouraging bit. [↩][7]

</div>

  [step-stool.io]: http://step-stool.io
  [1]: #fn:1
  [2]: #fn:2
  [Step Stool]: http://step-stool.io/images/step-stool-512.png
  [Cameron Morgan]: http://www.krop.com/spidercam/
  [SASS]: http://sass-lang.com/
  [MIT License]: http://opensource.org/licenses/MIT
  [3]: #fn:3
  [Bitbucket repository]: http://bitbucket.org/chriskrycho/step-stool
  [4]: #fn:4
  [README-driven development]: http://tom.preston-werner.com/2010/08/23/readme-driven-development.html
  [CoffeeScript]: http://coffeescript.org/
  [Zepto.js]: http://zeptojs.com/
  [↩]: #fnref:1
  [5]: #fnref:2
  [6]: #fnref:3
  [7]: #fnref:4
