Title: Stop Being a Product
Date: 2013-08-14 14:36
Author: chriskrycho
Category: Posts
Tags: advertising, App.net, payment, piracy
Slug: stop-being-a-product

*Or, Reflections Prompted by the One-Year Anniversary of App.net*

Yesterday, App.net turned a year old. Most of my friends in "real life"
have never even heard of the social network/platform,^[1][]^ so the
anniversary rightly went by unnoticed and unheralded. For me, however,
the day that App.net went live last year was the start of a sea change
in the way I approach the software I use -- a sea change that is still
in progress in many ways. What changed? I decided I wanted to [stop
being a product][] and start being a customer.

It's worth reading the [original proposal][] for App.net: a social
networking service, for which at least some users *pay*. This was
incredibly audacious for a social networking backbone (though, as
App.net founder Dalton Caldwell noted, not *completely* unheard of in
internet services: GitHub, Dropbox, and a number of others offer the
same model). Twitter was making it clear that they were following Google
and Facebook's models of selling customer info to advertisers, leaving
developers and users of the ecosystem to the whims of whatever made the
most sense for sales teams. Facebook's monetization plans were becoming
increasingly annoying (ads in my News Feed? No, that really isn't why
I'm here...). Google's data-mining was well known but increasingly
starting to bother me. All of these had a common thread: they were free
to use, on the premise that we don't mind being advertised to constantly
and our data being sold to and analyzed by advertising companies. More
and more, though, I *did* mind. The idea that I would pay for access to
a social networking backbone would have seemed crazy at some point; no
more.

The web was born and bred on free. In many ways, that has been a good
thing. The democratizing effects of free access are well-documented, and
people's ability to publish and read such a wide array of information
has been a great boon to the causes of education and liberty. On the
other hand, those trends have engendered an expectation that everything
digital *ought* to be free, and this expectation has had a great many
deleterious effects as well. We have seen mass piracy of music and
video, cutthroat rates (often consisting of "exposure") for writing, and
a flood of terrible content that always threatens to overwhelm the good
content available. On balance, I think the web has been a good
thing---but it has not been an unalloyed good, and in the last few years
an increasing number of people have become dissatisfied with the status
quo.

People deserve to be paid for their work, and at some point we have to
figure out how to make that happen. Ads have proven insufficient to
generate the revenue needed for sustainable business, but they have also
incentivized content-providers to aim at generating the most hits,
rather than providing the best content. This is not a new problem; the
same issue drove a lot of the "yellow journalism" of the last century.
The difference is that, coupled with the new, massive data and the
disconnecting nature of the web (you don't read a single "paper"
anymore, you read a bunch of articles from various places all over the
web), advertisizers have had both the means and the motive to pursue
practices that are increasingly proven corrosive to privacy and, in the
long run, contrary to the best interests of the public.

The way out---and the way that an increasing number of voices have
embraced, including those behind App.net---is to go back to paying for
things. (Shocking, I know!) With App.net, Dropbox, GitHub, and many
other web services, users pay for access to premium functionality.
App.net does not sell my data to anyone; they sell the engineering
backbone as a service to *me*, as well as to developers who want to use
that backbone to create their own services. Likewise, Dropbox doesn't
sell my data, they sell storage. GitHub doesn't sell my data, they sell
version control hosting.

I *love* this idea. So much so that I'm increasingly pulling out of
ad-supported services where I'm the product instead of the customer, and
moving toward things I pay for. It makes sure the service's incentives
are aligned with my best interests as a user, rather than orthogonally
and possibly detrimentally to my desires. Not least, it makes sure the
people building the service I'm using get paid. Those are good things.
It costs more, to be sure, but that helps me think through what to use
(and what to skip) more carefully, and that's a good thing, too.^[2][]^

Now, if we only someone could figure out a good way to do the same thing
with music, writing, and video...

Oh, and App.net? It's the single best social network I've ever
used---the quality of conversations I've had there is far, far better
than that I've had anywhere else. You should [check it out][].

<div class="footnotes">

* * * * *

1.  App.net is, strictly speaking, server infrastructure and an
    API---that is, a set of software tools that people can use to build
    services and the servers to run those services. It allows everything
    from [Twitter-like][] conversation streams to [personal journaling
    apps][] to [chat rooms][] or [clients][] to [file storage][] to
    [photo sharing][]. It is not just a social network; it is a way to
    *build* social networks. Curious? You can [join for free][check it
    out], and only upgrade to a paid account if it makes sense. [↩][]
2.  Most of these services have free tiers, but---importantly---those
    free tiers are subsidized by the paying customers, not by ad
    sales. [↩][3]

</div>

  [1]: #fn:1
  [stop being a product]: /web/the-little-things-why-im-done-with-android
  [original proposal]: http://daltoncaldwell.com/an-audacious-proposal
  [2]: #fn:2
  [check it out]: join.app.net/from/gjgzrkvyhz "Join App.net for free"
  [Twitter-like]: https://alpha.app.net/global
  [personal journaling apps]: http://ohaiapp.net/
  [chat rooms]: http://patter-app.net/
  [clients]: http://informalprotocol.com/2013/03/project-amy/
  [file storage]: http://files-app.net/
  [photo sharing]: http://photo-app.net/
  [↩]: #fnref:1
  [3]: #fnref:2
