Title: The Danger of Search Engine Optimization
Date: 2012-02-21 15:11
Author: chriskrycho
Category: Posts
Tags: search engine optimization, WordPress
Slug: the-danger-of-search-engine-optimization

I recently installed some search engine optimization plugins on the
WordPress back end of this site. In the main, these are fairly simple
tools with straightforward benefits. However, even in the first day of
having them installed on my site, I recognized that there are some
significant potential pitfalls in even having these tools present on my
site. When every post has beneath it a tool evaluating the search engine
efficiency of a given post, there is a significant danger of writing
content to the search engines, instead of writing content to your
audience. <!--more-->

Optimally, of course, the two would be one and the same, but the
challenge for any search algorithm is to filter noise while finding good
content. For a user, this means that the temptation to focus on being
found can begin to trump the need to write good content *as good
content*, for its own sake. When a site hits this point, the quality of
its articles goes downhill in a hurry - and unfortunately, if the
writers have become sufficiently skilled at playing the SEO game, their
articles may not decrease in rank. Then it is the users that suffer.

The problem is that algorithms can only analyze signals, and accordingly
they can be fooled. The last decade and a half of internet search engine
history are a long, unarguable record of one simple truth: *whenever
search engines get better at filtering spam, spammers get better at
using the search engines' algorithms to get their content in front of
users.*

Unlike email spam, a great deal of website spam isn't really illegal or
false. It's simply badly written - but badly written in such a way as to
effectively game the search engines. Motives for this vary, but usually
have to do with advertising revenue or general business profits. Nothing
wrong with that, as far as it goes, but it can get you in trouble in a
hurry when it compromises your approach to content, and it leaves users
with a bad taste in their mouths. They will come to dislike you and your
site - not an optimal outcome. (Quick: how many people actually *like*
about.com, and how many of you wish you never had to see a terrible
article from that abominable sump in your search results again?)

The real danger in having an SEO tool staring me in the face is the
temptation to constantly second-guess myself while writing, to think
about the ways I can make the post searchable, rather than the ways I
can make the post *valuable*. There is nothing wrong with using the
tool; there is everything wrong with being used by the tool. The best
way to take advantage of SEO analysis tools is to use them to tweak the
post when you're done. Ignore it during the process of writing the post;
use it as an editorial tool and not a director.

If there are small, simple ways to make a post or a page more
searchable, why not? If there are ways to provide more meaningful
descriptions for the search engine to display, why not? But the moment
that the SEO tool dictates content, rather than simply helping optimize
the content you would already be creating, you've got a problem.
