Title: Version 3.0
Date: 2012-01-12 18:49
Author: chriskrycho
Category: Posts
Tags: creativity, engineering, responsive design, site news
Slug: version-3-0

This is chriskrycho.com, Version 3.0. I'm a little sad that I deleted
Version 1, because seeing how far my sense of design has come over time
would be worth it, the inevitable laughter notwithstanding. You can see
the (much less dynamic) version 2 [here][]. The amount I've learned
about web design and development in the last year alone amazes me; I
can't wait to see how much better I can do a year from now.<!--more-->

### Introductory aside

Designgineering is a silly made-up word, but it's the closest I could
come to describing my approach to web design and development. I think
like a man who studied both physics and music composition in college
(because I did), and that is reflected in my approach to design in
general and this site in particular. I apply every ounce of creativity I
can, but approach challenges systematically and carefully, working
iteratively toward a solution. I design, and I engineer.

A confession is in order though: this first post is a bit more haphazard
than the engineering side of me would prefer. My first posts are always,
of a necessity, somewhat introductory, and also somewhat scattered.
Introductions may not be the best way to launch a site (I've heard lots
of opinions on this over the years), and a lack of extremely careful
organization *certainly* isn't (I've heard even more opinions on this).

The glorious thing about personal websites, though - especially blogs -
is that they are in fact *personal*. They lend themselves to
(thoughtful) rule-breaking and self-expression. If, like me, you find it
strange to simply jump in writing about a topic without having laid some
groundwork first, you'll be sympathetic to my need to get this post out.
If you're not like me, you have my heartfelt congratulations for being
undoubtedly much less weird, and I hope this post doesn't bore you too
much.

### Down to business

The goals I had for this site design were fairly simple: it needed to be
modern, have some personality, and be flexible enough to support a
variety of kinds of content. The sorts of posts that will be coming down
the line on From the Hearth, my family site, will be substantially
different than those here (for one, there won't be nearly as many
pictures here, and for another, if I ever put a snippet of code up over
there, I'm doing something terribly wrong).

From the getgo, I envisioned this site as being clean and somewhat
minimalistic, using different color schemes and typography to
differentiate the various parts of the site, and as up to date as I
could manage with web technologies appropriate to this sort of site.

The biggest highlights for me with this relaunch are in the typography -
an area I'm increasingly passionate about, and an area of the web which
is finally coming into its own. Thanks to [Typekit][], it is now
possible for me to supply every single font you see here to match my
vision - not constrained by the vagaries of font installation or even
browser support. (Go Typekit!) Of course, being a firm believer in both
progressive enhancement and graceful degradation, the site still looks
just fine if you have Javascript disabled and the fonts can't display.

In addition, I made sure that the layout fits with best practices in
terms of readability - the line lengths are not too long. I'm
increasingly sensitive to line-length on the web personally, finding
that sites where this isn't taken into account put a much greater strain
on me mentally. The last thing I wanted was to have that experience with
my own site.

Responsive design was a requirement from the start; I absolutely *love*
the ability the make the browser reflow properly for various screen
sizes. In terms of implementation, I approached this from a mobile-first
point of view, which at least in principle makes the issue of older
versions of IE more tractable as well. In practice, they still proved
difficult, but that's no surprise. Media queries allowed me to make the
site a bit friendlier for people with particularly large resolutions, as
well. I hope that we're entering into another era of screen resolution
increases, in which case having sites that respond to larger screens
will be increasingly important: who wants two thirds or more of their
screen to be uselessly empty? Beyond just increasing the text size,
we'll need to continue thinking of ways to make better use of the space,
including remembering that white space is good and valuable.

Visually, I'm quite pleased with how the site has turned out. There are
a number of things on the back end that still require some tweaking -
some of the newer features Wordpress has implemented for tumblr style
blogging in particular - but enough of the framework is solidly in place
that I have no qualms about getting this ball rolling.

Here's hoping the years ahead are both as intellectually challenging and
as rewarding as the last one has been!

  [here]: http://2010.chriskrycho.com "chriskrycho.com 2010"
  [Typekit]: http://www.typekit.com/
