Title: Why I Love Markdown
Date: 2013-03-02 20:07
Author: chriskrycho
Category: Posts
Tags: Bitbucket, GitHub, Markdown, markup languages, Textile, tools, writing
Slug: why-i-love-markdown

For about the last two months, I’ve steady been moving toward doing all
my writing in [Markdown][]. Truth be told, I’ve been moving that way
slowly off and on before that, having been looking for a simple syntax
like it for quite some time. I’d spent some time writing in
[Textile][]—a number of my posts for [Pillar on the Rock][] were
composed with it, and I’ve even used it on this site in the past with a
(now-largely defunct and therefore unlinked) plugin. Textile is great in
a lot of ways – if you’re looking for a syntax that maps directly to
HTML. (In fact, if that’s what you’re looking for, Textile is much
better than Markdown.)

Then, over the last six months or so, I’ve been using Markdown here and
there. <!--more--> It’s the standard markup language for [GitHub][] and
[Bitbucket][]. Especially as I’ve been using the latter more heavily –
both [for myself][] and for various projects with my consulting work –
increasing my familiarity with Markdown just made sense.

The project itself has been on my radar for a long while. I’ve been a
semi-regular reader of [Daring Fireball][] for a year or more, and I’ve
also watched with some interest as a number of prominent minimalist
writing environments launched with native support for the language –
notably [iA Writer][] and [Byword][]. All of this finally persuaded me
to sit down and try writing with it. And I *loved* it.

Like I said, I was familiar with the concept of a markup language of
this variety, having written quite a bit in Textile. But what Gruber got
right in his design of Markdown is the fact that it works as plain text.
(Look [here][] to see the plain text version of this post.) Textile
doesn’t. I mean, it reads okay if you know what’s going on, but if you
don’t, it’s just ugly. Markdown doesn’t have that problem, which is part
of what makes it a great choice for Readme files (which is precisely how
both Github and Bitbucket use it): you can read it perfectly well as a
plain text file, *and* it renders to HTML elegantly.

So I started using it. And had lots of [bugs][] with my
[then-preferred][] minimalist writing environment. It was annoying. I
tested out [Byword][]. And it was all over. My growing interest turned
into full-blown addiction. The kind that makes me proselytize; my poor
friends had to put up with a week or more of rants about how glorious it
is. I nagged at [Jaimie][] until she tried both Markdown and Byword, as
well. (She’s addicted, too.)

Markdown is simple enough to learn in a few minutes, clean and elegant
enough to be readable no matter your context, and darn near everywhere.
Almost every time I see a new app announced, it quietly (or loudly)
proclaims its support. It’s becoming the defacto markup language of the
Internet, at least among the slightly geekier types who know markup
languages. Throw in a tool like [Pandoc][] that lets you convert to just
about any *other* markup you can think of (including, surprisingly
enough, docx files for Microsoft Word), and you’re good to go – but you
don’t really need even that; there are plenty of good apps for each
platform that happily take your Markdown input and generate HTML for you
if you like.

I love it. Give it a shot; you probably will too.

  [Markdown]: http://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown/
    "Markdown Info and Syntax @ DaringFireball"
  [Textile]: http://textile.sitemonks.com/ "Home page of Textile"
  [Pillar on the Rock]: http://www.pillarontherock.com/
  [GitHub]: https://github.com/
  [Bitbucket]: https://bitbucket.org/
  [for myself]: /web/bitbucket
  [Daring Fireball]: http://daringfireball.net/
  [iA Writer]: http://www.iawriter.com/mac/ "iA Writer for Mac"
  [Byword]: http://bywordapp.com/
  [here]: http://dl.chriskrycho.com/why-i-love-markdown.md
  [bugs]: https://groups.google.com/forum/?fromgroups=#!topic/writeroomapp/GqBs6X1d8g0
  [then-preferred]: http://www.hogbaysoftware.com/products/writeroom
  [Jaimie]: http://jaimiekrycho.com/
  [Pandoc]: http://johnmacfarlane.net/pandoc/
