Title: A Matter of Hope
Date: 2012-04-02 16:51
Author: chriskrycho
Category: General interest
Tags: anger, driving, hope, Oklahoma, work
Slug: a-matter-of-hope

That [last post][] was written carefully. (I adapted it from an email to
friends, and even *then* I was careful.) It is exceptionally important,
I think, to speak and write carefully when our hearts are full of less
than pleasant things. As, truth be told, mine is when it comes to much
of the news I shared. I wanted to be clear that I see the direction we
are headed as good, and to make it clear that I trust God is working
these things for good.

However, the reality is that I am not particularly *happy* about the
decision. At times, I've been everything from mildly disappointed to
deeply angry about it. <!--more-->

So consider this an opportunity to vent - and like all opportunities to
vent, keep it in context. I know the theological truths; I've explained
to others how I'm holding onto them in the midst of this very
circumstances. But sometimes it helps to blow off steam. So here I am.

The simple reality is: I have *no* desire to stay in Oklahoma for an
additional five months, and even less (yes, that comes out to be
negative desire) to remain at my current job for that additional time.
The former because after nearly seven years, this state is really
starting to wear on me. Between the wind, the heat, the lack of hills
(yes, I know there are a few; and that is precisely my point), and the
general plainness of the landscape, I'm *done* with Oklahoma as a
locale. To those who love Oklahoma: God bless you; he has clearly given
you grace and vision beyond mine.

The people in Oklahoma, generally speaking, are great. I like the people
I know here. Except for their *driving*. I could probably create an
entire post simply ranting about that, as my wife and many others can
attest. I drove across an enormous expanse of the eastern half of the
United States last summer; our trip totaled well over 3000 miles. We
drove around in Boston on the Fourth of July; we drove through Brooklyn
at rush hour; we drove early at morning; we drove late at night; we
drove and we drove and we drove. And having done all that driving, I can
safely say that I would rather drive any of the other places we drove
than here in Oklahoma.

I don't blame the Oklahomans, not really: it's just that they've all
been taught to drive in the most frustrating way imaginable. (Whoever
decided to foist this joke on the rest of the nation, be warned: if I
ever find you, I will thump you about the room. At length.)

My job is an enormous source of frustration to me, as well. Suffice it
to say that government contracts and I are not made to have a long-term
relationship. My admiration for others who can take the system as it is
and fight the long slow fight against horrific measures of insanity,
idiocy, and incompetence have my admiration. This number includes many
of my Christian colleagues here, as well as my father, all of whom have
endured this morass far longer than I have and remain steadfast.

I have always struggled when facing futility in my work, even as a small
child. I loathed busywork throughout school; I cared nothing for
projects merely meant to fill time, because I would rather do something
- anything! - with value. Too much of our work here is a prolonged
exercise in futility for my emotional health in the long run; the fact
that the remainder of my run more than doubled in length put significant
weight on my shoulders.

In the meantime, I am keeping my eyes on the fact that the one thing I
do not see as futile despite a lack of change is relationships: only God
can produce real fruit or change in people's hearts. Unlike software
development, where I really can accomplish things, people are an utterly
intractable problem. It doesn't bother me when I can't fix people; it
makes sense to me that I can't. But I'm here at least in part (and
perhaps in very large part) so that I can be a light to the men and
women I work with.

I am, as it turns out, profoundly upset not to be moving to North
Carolina when we originally planned. I have moments bordering on
depression; I certainly feel melancholy about it regularly. I have bouts
of anger.

But I also have hope. And as with all of life, I find that much of our
response to our situations comes down to hope. Do we have hope that our
choices will matter, that God is in fact working all things to our glory
and his good, that we are not wasting our days? If we have that hope -
as I do, here in circumstances I do not prefer - then we can press on.
The absence of that hope is painful and debilitating.

I may not prefer, emotionally, the right choice right now. But it is
more than worth it, and I am thoroughly hopeful that out of it God will
work *many* good things. Perhaps most of all he will continue to work in
me a greater trust in him.

  [last post]: http://www.chriskrycho.com/family/general-interest/thoughts-about-labor-the-baby-kind/
    "Thoughts About Labor (the Baby Kind)"
