Title: A Mother's Day Letter to My Wife
Date: 2012-05-14 08:00
Author: chriskrycho
Category: General interest
Tags: baby, Jaimie
Slug: a-mothers-day-letter-to-my-wife

My love,

Today is your first Mother's Day, and I thought it might be nice to pen
you a note. (I was going to buy you flowers, but my aunt and uncle beat
me to the punch.)

In the four and a half years I've known you, and in the almost three
we've been married, I've gotten to see you walk through the fire of some
very great ordeals. So I know your strength, your courage, and your
willingness to press on - your willingness to soldier through, even when
doing so entails considerable pain and frustration in your life. I know
your heart for God, the way you want to please Him with your life, and
the depths of your commitment to loving him. I know your compassion, and
your incredibly tender heart, and your sweet and gentle spirit. I know
your verve, too, and the strength of character that runs in your veins.
In short: I know you to be a truly excellent woman. <!--more-->

And you will be a truly excellent mom! Every one of those glorious
features will shape the mother you are. You, I know, will be able to
deal with long nights and endless dirty diapers, with temper tantrums
and the overwhelming desire to eat everything in sight, with a colicking
and fussing, with teething and toddling. You will not just endure, you
will excel. You will be a picture - imperfect and stumbling, yes, but
still a very good picture - of the glorious grace of God to our little
girl. You will love her so very well! You will be there to listen to her
when things are hard, and to hold her when she has a bad day, and to
cheer for her when she succeeds, and to encourage her as she works hard
to accomplish each challenge she faces. You will be great!

I wouldn't want anyone else alongside me in this splendid adventure on
which we are about to embark. As I've watched you spend time with little
babies more and more in the last year and a half (I'm so glad Beth and
Dani shoved little Benjamin in your arms that Thanksgiving, and for your
time in the nursery, and for your time nannying little Ruthie), I've
seen just how much delight children bring you, and how good you are with
them, and I can't wait to see that play out with our own little girl.
She will adore you, and rightly so. You are going to be the best mom she
could ask for.

I love you! Happy first Mother's Day!
