Title: Almost 7 weeks. Things are changing.
Date: 2012-07-13 22:27
Author: chriskrycho
Category: Updates
Tags: baby, Elayne, family, fatherhood, Jaimie, ministry, prayer, providence, running, teaching, work
Slug: almost-7-weeks-things-are-changing

Ellie will be 7 weeks old on Sunday. To put it mildly, that just seems
crazy. It's not going too fast, but I sure don't want to blink.

<figure class="vertical" style="text-align: center">
![picture of Ellie looking sleepy one morning before I left for work][]

</p>
<figcaption>
Ellie, looking sleepy one morning before I left for work

</figcaption>
</figure>
<!--more-->She smiled - really smiled - for the first time tonight; it
was one of the most beautiful things I have ever seen. She's growing in
every way. Looking back to pictures of her the day we brought her home
from the hospital and comparing to now, it's amazing how much she's
already grown and changed. She's eating well and getting great little
rolls on her arms and legs to match her adorably chubby baby cheeks.

We've been blessed to have great support from Wildwood Community Church
and other Christian friends: lots of food, lots of volunteers to help
with giving Jaimie time out while I'm at work, lots of help with little
details like laundry. A few weeks ago, Jaimie's parents came up for a
visit, as well, and Jaimie's mom spent a few days here helping take care
of the little one â€“ giving us a much-appreciated hour or so out by
ourselves on a date, a first since May 27.

Last weekend, we traveled down to Fort Worth, where Elayne got to spend
time with lots of doting relatives. My mother-in-law absolutely spazzed
out in her delight over Ellie; it was probably the cutest thing I've
ever seen her do, but perhaps also the most terrifying.

<figure class="vertical" style="text-align: center">
![picture of Ellie with her paternal grandfather][]

</p>
<figcaption>
Elayne with Grandpa Grojtan

</figcaption>
</figure>
We got to spend some time with Jaimie's grandmother at here (very nice)
retirement home just a few miles away from Jaimie's parents place. One
of my favorite moments of the whole trip was seeing all four generations
of women together. Despite her slowly fading body, it was clear that
Grandma Grotjan absolutely loved seeing the little baby (even if she did
let her ornery side show with me a bit!).

<figure class="vertical" style="text-align: center">
![picture of Ellie, Jaimie, Lola (maternal grandmother), and Great
Grandma Grojtan][]

</p>
<figcaption>
Jaimie, Ellie, "Lola", and (Great-)Grandma Grotjan

</figcaption>
</figure>
(I do believe that is my favorite picture I've ever taken with a phone
camera; it's certainly one of my favorite pictures of our extended
family on Jaimie's side. Too cool.)

We then spent the evening and the next morning with our dear friends [PJ
and Katie and their wonderful children][]. It was fun seeing "Uncle PJ"
and "Aunt Katie" spend time with our little girl. As ever, I found
myself refreshed just spending time with people who get me, and who just
roll with it even when they don't - as, let's face it, I'm something of
an odd fellow sometimes.

Apart from Ellie, life goes on much as it ever does. I try to find time
to write; I squeeze in reading time where I can find it; I am slowly
getting back on track with my running (three times each of the last
three weeks - here's hoping I can make this week a four-run week
tomorrow morning). I very much enjoy my new job with Quest Consultants,
Inc. I appreciate my coworkers; I enjoy the small company and the
correspondingly higher degrees of independence, responsibility, and
trust placed in my hands; and I really love having windows that look out
into the real world. I've had a little lull in my web development
consulting, which came at a perfect time for us, and now it's picking up
again, which is great for helping us prepare for seminary.

Add on the fact that I now get to come home and have lunch with Jaimie
and Elayne almost every day of the week, and I couldn't be much happier
with my work situation.

We continue to deeply enjoy the time we spend with our community group -
a solid core of godly men and women in almost every life stage (we still
need some grandparents and some teenagers) - and I still love teaching.

I continue to grow in appreciation for Wildwood Community Church. It's
not a perfect place, of course, and there are lots of things I would
change if I could, but as I commented to a friend recently, it has been
a great home for us and my main responsibility is simply to pray. In the
last six months alone I have seen answers to prayers I have offered for
the last 18 to 24 months. It's been a good reminder first that God does
answer prayers and second that I not only can but should trust him to
accomplish his will in the church. For a young man who wants to go into
vocational ministry, there is probably no single more important lesson
to learn. God will establish his church with or without me. My part is
prayerful reliance and obedience; his part is everything else.

I will do my best to keep this page updated more frequently, and to post
photos as often as we get them, and - for our families' sake especially
- to take more pictures in general.

  [picture of Ellie looking sleepy one morning before I left for work]: http://www.chriskrycho.com/family/files/2012/07/sleepy_morning.jpeg
    "Sleepy Morning"
  [picture of Ellie with her paternal grandfather]: http://www.chriskrycho.com/family/files/2012/07/jim_with_ellie.jpeg
    "Jim with Ellie"
  [picture of Ellie, Jaimie, Lola (maternal grandmother), and Great
  Grandma Grojtan]: http://www.chriskrycho.com/family/files/2012/07/four_generations.jpeg
    "Four Generations"
  [PJ and Katie and their wonderful children]: http://www.adoptedbytheking.com
