Title: Baby, musings, video games
Date: 2012-02-28 07:20
Author: chriskrycho
Category: General interest
Tags: baby, entertainment, family, Jaimie
Slug: baby-musings-video-games

Baby girl has been kicking up a storm - enough to keep Jaimie from
sleeping some nights. She's also gotten what seems quite large, but
apparently she's about to kick off a growth spurt. Between now and the
end of the pregnancy, she will triple or even quadruple in size. That's
frankly mind-blowing, as is most of pregnancy. There is, you know, *a
person* growing in there. <!--more-->

I've always been deeply opposed to abortion on scriptural and
philosophical grounds. Watching Jaimie go through pregnancy and
grappling with my own fatherhood has experientially cemented those
convictions. I am a father *now*. Not when our little girl is born;
right now. I have watched friends grieve the loss of an unborn child
just as they would the loss of one who had been born. The folly of our
culture - its inane belief that the parents can decide whether the
distinct human being growing is in fact a person or just a blob of
tissue - has never been more profoundly abhorrent to me.

I should immediately clarify: I do not think those who have had
abortions are moral monsters. I do think they have been tragically
misled into committing a horrid act under the pretense that it is
morally neutral. We in the church ought to do a better job of offering
the comfort and aid of the gospel - *every* sin forgiven and paid for in
the work of Christ - and remembering that though the culture wars may be
fought, we should seek to minimize civilian casualties.

On a less serious note, Jaimie and I are eagerly awaiting the release of
*Mass Effect 3*, the epic conclusion to a video game trilogy we both
love. I have the rare blessing of a wife who enjoys watching me play
video games as much as I enjoy playing them. (Truth be told, she might
enjoy watching *more* than I enjoy playing.) I've been amused to see how
advertising of games has developed over the last few years, and indeed
how the presentation of the games has changed. When the first game in
this trilogy came out, the public marketing was relatively restrained,
and the game began much like a traditional video game, though with a
hint of cinematic influence. The second game had some TV promotion and
made an overt step to display its titles just as if opening a movie.
This third game has seen 3-minute long cinematic trailers in the vein of
movie trailers, and I have no doubt it will present itself in the vein
of a serious action movie in many ways.

I find the development of the gaming world fascinating. A decade ago,
games were considered the province of nerds only. Sometime in the
intervening span, that perception began to shift. I credit three
factors. First, the maturation of the game industry itself: developers
have taken an increasing interest in constructing their characters and
stories in a more approachable way. Jaimie likes watching me play
because the games are interesting fiction. Second, the explosion of
smartphones, led by the ubiquitous iPhone, has led to a much wider
audience for games in general. Think Angry Birds and the many other
wildly successful games. These many not be the massive titles "gamers"
play, but when any grandmother may be playing a video game (whether she
thinks of it that way or not), the world has changed. Finally, it has
simply become untenable to think of games as an out-there phenomenon
when blockbuster games regularly outperform blockbuster movies
financially. The biggest entertainment releases of the last half decade
have all been games.

I'll be curious to see what the world of entertainment looks like in
another decade, in any case.

And with that, I'm done rambling for now.
