Title: Challenges, blessings, and transitions
Date: 2012-02-11 22:35
Author: chriskrycho
Category: Updates
Tags: baby, marriage, Oklahoma, running, transitions, weather, winter, work
Slug: challenges-blessings-and-transitions

If I haven't written much this week on most of my blogs, well, it's
because I've been pretty busy.

One of the major transitions Jaimie and I have already gone through is
that I've picked up some extra work on the side. I now spend 10-15 hours
a week doing back end web development consulting work. <!--more-->This
is extremely helpful in terms of saving for seminary, as you can
imagine: it pays well, and the money all goes directly into savings.
What with Jaimie working as a nanny until sometime close to when Baby
Girl comes, we will, God willing, be in fairly decent shape financially
when we get to seminary.

I enjoy the work a lot. Programming appeals to me, especially in the
area of web development. The field is constantly changing, so if you
want to stay on top of it, you have to keep learning all the time.
Anyone who knows me knows that fits my personality to a T. There are
also opportunities for *anyone* to contribute tools that everyone else
can find useful. (I made [one of those][] already in my spare time, and
have a couple more in the pipe. Some of them even normal, non-technical
people might find useful!) I also find it incredibly rewarding to be
able to finish projects, and most of the projects I'm working on right
now have short turn-around times, so I can see results in a matter of
days or weeks - unlike my regular job, where turnaround times are
measured in *years*.

There is a downside, though. Namely, that I'm working an extra 10-15
hours a week. As you can imagine, Jaimie and I have had some challenges
to work through. We have less time together, so we have to work harder
at appreciating the times we do have, and at being intentional about
using the time we have to really engage with one another. These are not
bad things, *per se*, but they are different, and they are challenging.

Even these challenges are a blessing, though. This is a good preview: my
time commitment now is comparable to what it will be while I am at
Southeastern, so we get to make this transition well ahead of the other
major transitions coming up in our lives. Everything will be thrown
entirely on its head when our daughter is born, and then again when we
move and I change jobs and start seminary and we have to find a new
church.

Other than the fact that Baby Girl is kicking more frequently and a bit
harder, not much else is changing here. As is often the case, life
itself is fairly ordinary. Our sanctification happens bit by bit and
piece by piece, not in great events.

The one major change we *have* experienced? Oklahoma decided to remember
- at least for two or three days - that it is, in fact, wintertime. I
opted *not* to go for a run today... because it was under 30ยบ and quite
windy all day. (The warmest it has felt all day is *right now*, because
the wind finally stopped blowing.) By Tuesday, it will be back to
feeling like early spring. There are worse things, I suppose, but I do
miss my Colorado winters...

  [one of those]: http://www.chriskrycho.com/web/projects/ligatures-plus-js/
    "Ligatures-plus.js"
