Title: Early November… already!
Date: 2012-11-09 21:20
Author: chriskrycho
Category: Updates
Tags: Elayne, Jaimie, moving, North Carolina, Oklahoma, picture, running, transitions
Slug: early-november-already

I'm not quite sure how we got this far through the year already. Ellie
is five and a half months old; we're leaving for North Carolina in less
than two months; my second half-marathon of the year is two days away;
and somehow it doesn't seem like it's been 11 months since I launched
this little family blog. Time flies. When you're having fun, or when
you're busy, or especially when you're busy *and* you're having fun,
time really flies.

<figure class="horizontal">
![Portrait of Ellie][]

</p>
<figcaption class="center">
Adorable Ellie - picture by [Lori Abernethy][]

</figcaption>
</figure>
<!--more-->When last I wrote, Ellie was in the habit of knocking her
bottle out of her mouth and sometimes her parents' hands while we were
feeding her, she had just started rolling from her back to her stomach,
and she was nowhere near crawling. Tonight, she fed herself the whole
last ounce of milk out of her bottle with zero intervention from me; she
spent the hour before that doing barrel rolls across the floor
(something she started two weeks ago); and she's definitely going to be
crawling within a month - there's a good chance she'll be doing it
before Thanksgiving and her six-month birthday, at her current rate of
progress. She's got the legs down, and one arm; once she figures out
that she needs to move her right arm, too, she'll be off to the races.
God help us! (I mean that prayer quite literally.)

<figure class="horizontal">
![Ellie stretching with me][]

</p>
<figcaption class="center">
Stretching together - picture by Jaimie Krycho

</figcaption>
</figure>
I've finished training up for another half-marathon. In two days, I'll
be running with around a thousand other folks, hoping to set a personal
best - aiming to break the 1:30 mark. That's *fast*, for me at least:
that means running about 6 minutes and 50 seconds on the mile, for 13.1
miles. I've trained well, though - lots of 40+ mile weeks, once all the
way up to 50, and maxing out my longest run ever at a little over 17
miles. I feel very prepared, and after a couple weeks tapering off, I'm
pretty ready to go. I have a little two-mile, super easy run here in a
few minutes, and then Sunday morning, at 8:30 am, it's literally off to
the races.

I've been super busy with my regular job - which, praise God, I still
really enjoy - and with outside work. In addition to launching a custom
built content management system for the Continuing Medical Education
page of the Oklahoma Medical Board, I recently launched Jaimie's
[professional writing site][] and am within a week or two of launching a
friend's professional calligraphy site. What with our move coming up
shortly, I got to be involved in hiring my replacement, who started at
the end of last week and is now getting up to speed on just how crazy
some of the software in our code base really is.

It's a little strange not knowing *exactly* what our financial situation
is going to look like in two months, but we know that God will provide
for us, as he always has. That's who he is. In the meantime, we've been
saving like crazy, and we've already started tightening our belts a
little here and there, and cleaning up and selling things we don't need
- my old refrigerator from college, for example, which has gotten a
surprising amount of use over the last few years, what with the many
people we've had stay or live with us, but which we certainly no longer
need.

Indeed, we're starting to really come into that transition time in
general: thinking about saying goodbye to friends here, about packing up
our apartment, about selling my car, you name it. (Yes, my much-enjoyed
Mazda 3 is going to be sold off: we only need one car while I'm in
seminary. If you're interested, let me know. It's a stick shift, and
it's a great car. I'm going to miss it.)

<figure class="horizontal" style="max-width: 18em; margin-right: auto; margin-left: auto">
![Jaimie and me at T.E.A. Café][]</a>

</p>
<figcaption class="center">
One last trip to T.E.A. Café

</figcaption>
</figure>
Jaimie and I took one last trip to T.E.A. Café, the restaurant to which
I took her on our first date, almost five years ago now. It was fun. A
lot has changed - we've both grown up a lot, we have a baby now, we're
very different than when I was a college junior and she a college
freshman - but she's still delightful, and even prettier than she was
then. It was strange, thinking that we probably won't be back there
again; certainly we won't any time soon. And that's true of lots of
things.

I'm going to miss my baristas at Hastings Hardback Coffee Café - the
top-rated Hastings café in the country, and for good reason. I'm going
to miss my friends at Wildwood, and playing piano there. I'm going to
miss my current job. I probably won't miss Oklahoma weather or drivers,
but it will nonetheless be strange to leave behind this place I've
called home the past seven years and some change.

There's more to say - not least about our new love for <cite>Doctor
Who</cite> - but I've gone on long enough and I've that little 2-mile
run yet to do tonight. Grace and peace to all who read.

  [Portrait of Ellie]: http://2012-2013.chriskrycho.com/family/files/2012/11/ellie_portrait.jpeg
    "ellie_portrait"
  [Lori Abernethy]: http://justpictureitonline.com/
  [Ellie stretching with me]: http://2012-2013.chriskrycho.com/family/files/2012/11/stretching.jpg
    "stretching"
  [professional writing site]: http://jaimiekrycho.com/
  [Jaimie and me at T.E.A. Café]: http://2012-2013.chriskrycho.com/family/files/2012/11/teacafe.jpeg
    "teacafe"
