Title: Elayne Kaylee Krycho
Date: 2012-06-08 00:06
Author: chriskrycho
Category: Updates
Slug: elayne-kaylee-krycho

Alternate title: *So, we had a baby...*

Most of you have gotten the memo already, but Jaimie and I had our
little girl! Elayne Kaylee Krycho was born on May 27 at 1:39 pm; she
weighed 6 pounds and 4 oz, and she was just over 18 inches long.

<figure class="vertical" style="text-align: center">
![picture of Jaimie and Elayne less than an hour after Elayne was
born][]

</p>
<figcaption>
Jaimie and Elayne, less than an hour after Elayne was born

</figcaption>
</figure>
<!--more-->Our lives since then have been a bit topsy turvy, as you
might imagine. Sleeping at night? Not so much. Elayne has decided she
much prefers sleeping during the day. This isn't really a surprise, for
two reasons: first, this is typical of babies; second, she did this
before she was born, too. More than once, she kept Jaimie up between 1
am and 3 am because she was kicking so much. Now she gets to keep me up,
too.

It's been an enormous amount of fun, so far, which is good - because
it's hard work, too. Babies are like that.

We've had tons of visitors in the first week and a half, of course, and
that's been both encouraging and tiring. Encouraging, especially for
Jaimie, because the baby can be quite overwhelming and it's nice to
spend time with other adults. It's easy to begin to feel as though the
baby is the only other person in the world, especially when you're up
with her at 3 am again.

On the other hand, both Jaimie and I are introverts. People might not
realize it, as both of us are fairly outgoing day to day. We're both
friendly and talkative, and we love people. But we both need alone time
to recharge. My runs have been helpful for me that way over the last
couple years. Writing, too, meets the same need - for both of us, I
think, though Jaimie would have to confirm that. In any case, much as
we've loved all the visitors, and much as they've been lifesavers for
Jaimie, it was a huge relief to both of us to take a couple hours
tonight just chilling out together while the baby slept, cuddling on the
sofa and watching a silly show and not having other people around or
taking care of Elayne.

<figure class="vertical">
![picture of Elayne sleeping on my mom's lap][]

</figure>
One of the biggest challenges for me has been the way our schedule has
changed. I don't mind sitting up with her, as a general rule. Several of
the evenings, I've been able to read while sitting up with her, and
that's never a bad thing. I've even *mostly* gotten the same amount of
sleep, it's been at different times. As a result, I haven't been able to
run but twice since Elayne was born.

To the non-runners out there (which is most of you, I realize), that
might not seem like such a bad thing. For me, however, running has
become something of a fixed point in my life. It's an opportunity to
recharge mentally and emotionally. It's my consistent introvert time;
when I get it I'm much happier and have a much easier time relating well
to the people in my life, especially Jaimie. Exercise is good for us, on
many levels. I'm less tired and have more energy through the day; I'm
more emotionally level; I have better concentration on work tasks - you
name it, it's better when I'm exercising.

The flipside is that I'm worse in each of those areas when I'm *not*
exercising. It's also frustrating to consider the possibility of losing
ground that I've worked hard to gain over the last year. I've long since
resigned myself to the fact that I'm not going to be *gaining* ground
any time soon, but I'd really like not to find myself starting over at
the end of the summer again. Doing that last July was once too many
times.

<figure class="vertical">
![picture of Jaimie and Elayne sleeping next to each other on the
floor][]

</figure>
All of that goes to highlight a broader issue I've begun to face
already: my own selfishness. As I finished up my run this morning -
offering thanks to God for the chance to get out, and for relatively
cool weather - I thought to myself, *I really wouldn't mind being up
with Elayne if I could just write or read or do something productive at
the same time.* The thought made sense to me just then; it had been a
long and frustrating morning already. A moment later, though, the
essential absurdity of the thought struck home.

What I was really saying is: *I'd be happy to take care of Elayne if
only it didn't inconvenience me.*

Praise God, the Holy Spirit made the sheer sinfulness of that thought
pattern apparent in short order. It rocked me back on my heels a bit.
It's one thing to acknowledge in some general sense that we are sinful
and selfish. It is another thing entirely to see your own selfishness
staring you full in the face. I am happy to take care of Elayne as long
as she doesn't make my life more difficult. God, by contrast, has
delighted to care for me in spite of the great cost involved.

I have much to learn, it seems. Preach the gospel to myself - and to
her: we started the Westminster Shorter Catechism with her the first
night - and hold fast to God's unfathomable grace. It is enough.

  [picture of Jaimie and Elayne less than an hour after Elayne was
  born]: http://www.chriskrycho.com/family/files/2012/06/just_born.jpeg
    "Just Born"
  [picture of Elayne sleeping on my mom's lap]: http://www.chriskrycho.com/family/files/2012/06/on_grandmas_lap.jpeg
    "On Grandma's Lap"
  [picture of Jaimie and Elayne sleeping next to each other on the
  floor]: http://www.chriskrycho.com/family/files/2012/06/mom_and_baby.jpeg
    "Mom and Baby"
