Title: From North Carolina
Date: 2013-02-03 08:45
Author: chriskrycho
Category: Updates
Tags: Elayne, Jaimie, North Carolina, writing
Slug: from-north-carolina

I write from North Carolina. (I’ve done that on this blog [once
before][], but not at any real length.) Out my back door is a forest,
with deer that come to call on a regular basis. In front of our cozy
little townhome is a nice long stretch of grass, on which the children
of other seminary students run about and play when the weather is nice.
Up a *very* steep hill from here is [Southeastern Baptist Theological
Seminary][], where I have been taking classes for two full weeks
now.<!--more-->

It’s a bit strange that I’ve only been here just under three weeks, and
taking classes a bit under two. It feels much longer, in a good way. It
feels like home. The last time I made this sort of move was seven and a
half years ago, when I left Colorado for Oklahoma. I enjoyed that move,
but it certainly took a lot longer to feel that I was at “home” in
Oklahoma. (I only recall noting that feeling around Christmastime, when
I first experienced the strange tension of feeling at home at my
parents’ home and simultaneously missing my home.)

In some ways, though, it’s no surprise. After all, I have a great deal
more solidity constituting my “home” now. Jaimie and Ellie make an
enormous difference in that regard. It matters, too, that I sit writing
from a sofa that I own in a townhome (not a dorm) surrounded by other
things we own. Possessions, to be sure, do not make a home, but having
things of our own filling the space matters quite a bit in the feel of
things here.

Having friends here with us helps enormously. Our dear friends [PJ][]
and [Katie][] moved here exactly a week before we did, and so in God’s
good providence we’re all starting this new phase of life *together*.
Beginning with friends, rather than with the loneliness of knowing no
one at all, makes the transition much easier. Beginning with very *good*
friends make its fun, even when challenging at times.

The church search
-----------------

We are of course looking for a new church here - and that, too, is made
easier by having friends with whom to make the search. We’ve narrowed
our options down to two, [First Baptist Church Durham][] and [North Wake
Church][], two robust and healthy Southern Baptist churches. We like
everything we’ve seen of both so far, and it’s hard to choose between
the two. While we align a little more closely with FBC Durham on some
secondary issues - in fact, it’s almost exactly how we would like to
approach church - it’s a 35-minute drive away. North Wake is all of 6
minutes away, and we’re in 85% agreement with them on those secondary
issues. (Both churches hit it right out of the park on all the primary
issues, and for that matter on *other* secondary issues.) Part of the
difficulty in our decision lies in the tension between our commitment to
these doctrinal distinctives, which are important, and our need for
community, which is also important. The time it takes to drive to and
from is not inconsequential either.[[1]][]

FBC Durham has several healthy home groups that meet in Wake Forest, so
it is not as though we would be absent community. We *love* what we see
of the church. In many ways, its warts not withstanding, it’s the sort
of church I’ve longed to go to for years. On the other hand, North Wake
is an *excellent* church that ticks off almost all our boxes and it
would be enormously easier to find friends here in Wake Forest going
there. Indeed, North Wake attracts a lot of the seminary students
precisely because it hits the right note in so many areas while being
close to campus.

We’ll be visiting both, as well as their community groups, at least once
more, and spending a lot of time praying about it. God will put us where
he wants and us, and it will be good. It’s a delight, in any case, to
have a choice between such good churches.

Home life
---------

In other news, Ellie is 8 months old and crawling like crazy. She’s
vocalizing all the time (this morning she said, “Hi, daddy,” though I’m
pretty sure she didn’t mean to). She’s imitating our motions at times -
waving, or shaking her head - and exploring *everything*. Our little
girl is incredibly curious about her world, and with her increased
mobility she now has access to a great deal more of that world. We have
“baby-proofed” outlets and the like, but she loves computer cords, and
with our laptops out she’s often going for them.

She’s also hit the point where she’s slowly learning what we mean when
we say “no”. We aim to keep temptation out of her hands for the most
part, but she does require the occasional active correction. Real
discipline hasn’t started yet, especially because her memory is
sufficiently short-term that she forgets what we tell her quite quickly.

I’ve been rather amused, actually, to see the pattern play out: she gets
into something, we tell her no and pull her away from it, she plays
happily for a moment, and then notices whatever we pulled her away from
again and starts toward it again. As of yet, her response is quite
clearly not one of disobedience; she simply doesn’t have much of an
attention span.

On the other hand, she is growing increasingly independent. Jaimie and I
can now leave her on the floor in her room with some safe toys for a
while and she’ll happily and contentedly play by herself. We regularly
find her happily playing and cooing in her crib in the mornings.

Jaimie and I *love* our new townhome. Sometime soon we’ll take and post
pictures. It’s super cozy, much nicer than our old apartment, and just
feels homier than any place I lived in Oklahoma. And while the last
month was stressful enough to make our marriage challenging - stress
does that, unmarried folk! - God has seen us through and we’re
continuing to learn to love each other well day by day.

The one thing I still need to get going is my workout routine! I haven’t
run regularly since my last half-marathon in November, as I got sick and
then we moved. I’m looking forward to getting back into it, not least
since Raleigh has a much more active running community (and schedule!)
than Oklahoma.

Various projects
----------------

In my last post, I noted that I wasn’t sure what my work situation here
would look like. That has solidified substantially, at least for the
moment. I’m happily continuing to work as a software developer for
[Quest Consultants Inc.][] about 20 hours each week. I’ve also had a few
queries come my way for website development, which I’d love to pick up
once I wrap up a couple other projects I’ve had going in the background.

With our move over, Jaimie is finally starting to get back into the
groove with her writing (as evidenced by her really fantastic [blog
post][] yesterday). I, for one, am incredibly excited for her to get
back into her [Bloodlines][] project.

School will afford me many opportunities for a rather different sort of
writing than I’ve done the past few years. Wherever sensible, I’ll share
that (as I did [here][]). I’ve also had a lot more time for thinking and
reading[[2]][] and - God be praised! - writing in general. I’ve been
able to post a lot more on [Ardent Fidelity][], am somewhat keeping up
[No Segue][] (though truth be told I haven’t been reading enough tech
stuff to post as well as I’d like there). I expect, as we settle into a
routine, that I’ll be able to write even more.

On which note: that promised info from my last post, about a book I’m
working on? Well, as it turns out, I’m out of time: we’re off to [North
Wake Church][]. So that’ll have to wait for another time. Yes, I know:
I’m a tease.

<section class="footnotes">

* * * * *

1.  Neither is the cost of gas driving to and from. With prices around
    \$3.50 per gallon, that adds up in a hurry - especially if we go
    over there more than once a week. [ ↩][]

2.  Seminary helps with that just a bit, too: it forces me to read books
    of just the sort I like reading anyway. I keep having to remind
    myself not to feel guilty, since doing that sort of reading is
    actually a *responsibility* now. [ ↩][1]

</section>

  [once before]: http://2012-2013.chriskrycho.com/family/getting-settled-in
    "Getting Settled In"
  [Southeastern Baptist Theological Seminary]: http://sebts.edu/
  [PJ]: http://pjking.net/
  [Katie]: http://www.adoptedbytheking.com/
  [First Baptist Church Durham]: http://www.fbcdurham.org/
  [North Wake Church]: http://www.northwake.com/
  [[1]]: #fn:1 "see footnote"
  [Quest Consultants Inc.]: http://questconsult.com/
  [blog post]: http://jaimiedawn.blogspot.com/2013/02/contemplations-of-young-mom-first-part.html
    "Contemplations of a Young Mom, First Part"
  [Bloodlines]: http://jaimiekrycho.com/bloodlines
  [here]: http://2012-2013.chriskrycho.com/theology/god-will-provide-for-himself-the-lamb
    "God will provide for himself the lamb"
  [[2]]: #fn:2 "see footnote"
  [Ardent Fidelity]: http://2012-2013.chriskrycho.com/theology
  [No Segue]: http://nosegue.tumblr.com/
  [ ↩]: #fnref:1 "return to article"
  [1]: #fnref:2 "return to article"
