Title: Fun and Games and Frustrations
Date: 2012-07-24 07:43
Author: chriskrycho
Category: General interest
Tags: Elayne, fatherhood, frustration, fun, gospel, sanctification
Slug: fun-and-games-and-frustrations

Elayne has apparently made it one of her early life goals to spit up on
my nicer shirts. Whenever I'm holding her, patting her back, post
feeding, she strains toward the edge of the burp cloth, tugs on it to
pull the sides together, and generally makes every possible effort to
guarantee that when she does finally get out a big burp (and some
spit-up with it), my polo will be the recipient rather than the
wonderful tie-dyed cloth.

This, of course, isn't quite accurate: she's not doing it on purpose.
Indeed, at 8 weeks old, Ellie really isn't doing much "on purpose" yet;
her mental capacities have not developed to the point of complex
intentions. She is, at three days shy of two months old, showing more
and more signs of active engagement and interactivity with the world and
with us. It's remarkable and fun to see her intelligence flowering, her
emotional palette broadening, and her physical capabilities increasing -
from interacting with objects to making a wider variety of noises.

I'd be lying if I said it was all fun and games, though.
<!--more-->Parents sometimes comment about how much God uses their
children to sanctify them, and every time I sent Jaimie out for her
evenings at a coffee shop - time to write, to think, to simply enjoy
being out and not having to worry about the baby - I get another taste
of that sanctifying process.

Sweet little Ellie can get downright grumpy when mommy is out in the
evening. It isn't the absence of mommy that is the problem, exactly:
7-9pm is just not a great time for Elayne. Jaimie usually keeps her calm
by taking care of her constantly for those couple hours, and has started
to find ways to do other things - playing games on her phone, etc. -
during that time. When Jaimie is out however, she has no breast to rest
against, and it turns out my chest isn't nearly as comforting.

Sometimes, as last night, that makes for a challenging evening. Spending
two hours with a baby who apparently used up all her cuteness earlier in
the day with grandparents and saved up all her fussiness to come out in
a rush isn't anyone's idea of fun. Add in a heaping dose of hunger -
Jaimie nursed her well, and then she proceeded to down 6 ounces of
formula while Jaimie was out - and a bit of a temper (something I'm
already praying for) and you have a recipe for an unpleasant evening.
Again, it is not that Elayne does any of this intentionally.

In the moment, though, it can feel very personal: as though she is
actively trying to sabotage the evening, or even as though she just
doesn't *like* me. Hearing stories about all the cute playtime she had
with Jaimie's parents when they came for a visit yesterday, and then
experiencing one block of 3 minutes of cuteness sandwiched in the midst
of two and a half hours of constant wailing or eating, left me feeling
both frustrated and sad. As I put it to Jaimie: it is perfectly silly to
think Elayne active likes or dislikes me the way it felt last night.

Those emotions are strong, sometimes even overwhelmingly so; but she
doesn't have the capacity to do anything intentionally yet. She was just
tired and hungry. (So very hungry. The girl has an appetite. When I set
her down between bottles to go make another, she screamed at the top of
her little lungs until I got back, convinced, it seems, that she had
been abandoned and would starve to death. This after having already
eaten nearly nonstop for an hour and a half...)

All of this offers plenty of opportunity to grow in longsuffering, in
love, and in dependence on the grace of God. If it is clich√©, at this
point in the parenting post, to turn and describe how I started
reflecting on God's grace toward us and our dependence on him, it is not
without reason. Parenting, in my (still limited) experience and in my
observations of others' experiences, is a daily reminder of how much we
need God. Elayne depends on us for her food, for her clothing, for her
safety, and to help regulate her schedule. We depend on God for
*everything*: for our bodies, for the air we breathe, for the laws of
nature to be upheld and the universe not to simply cease to exist. We
squall just as loudly as Elayne when things don't come as quickly as we
want; like her we often lack the capacity to even recognize that God is
already preparing the things we need for us. Christian parenting posts
often turn this way because parenting often turns this way. God
graciously highlights for us our need for him, our dependence on his
grace, our need for deep sanctification and Christlike love. And it is
so very good, even - perhaps especially - when it is most difficult.
