Title: Laying A Foundation
Date: 2012-09-07 07:59
Author: chriskrycho
Category: General interest
Tags: Elayne, family, God, parenting, picture, responsibility, teaching, transitions
Slug: laying-a-foundation

Ellie's latest developmental transition seems to include a much more
active recognition of Jaimie's and my presence in a room with her - or
lack thereof! Our sweet-tempered little girl is no less sweet-tempered,
but suddenly she is much needier of our physical presence to be happy.
(It also means she's starting to find peek-a-boo funny. Her reactions
are priceless.)

<figure class="vertical" style="text-align: center">
[![Ellie in a jumper][]][]

</p>
<figcaption>
Elayne in her jumper!

</figcaption>
</figure>
<!--more-->She has also forgotten how to go to sleep on time. (This is,
apparently, normal for this stage.) While she used to be fairly
consistent about going to sleep for the night around 9:00 pm, she now
prefers to be up until 10:30 or 11:00 pm.

Most of all, she wants to be awake and *with us* that whole time. Leave
her in her room, with the lights off, and she'll be fussing up a storm
within a minute or two, but as soon as we go get her - as soon as she is
being held, and then as long as she can see us - she is happy again. Not
just content, but smiles-to-light-up-the-room-happy. It's as if she is
saying, "Oh, there's Mommy! There's Daddy! They're still here! They love
me, and they're taking care of me! That's more than just okay, that's so
good!"

The smiles and gurgles and hilarious attempts at laughter (she hasn't
quite figured it out yet, so mostly she makes a repeated coughing noise
whenever she thinks something is really funny) are delightful of course.
Even so, as 10:30 rolls around and she shows no signs of slowing down,
Jaimie and I can get frustrated. We're tired, and ready for our happy
baby to be happily asleep by that point. Truth be told, even the smiles
can start to wear thin: we think (and sometimes say to her), "Hey,
cutie, can you store some of this up and share it in the middle of the
day tomorrow? Sleep now, play then?" No doubt God is using this season
to work many things in us.

What is equally striking to me is to consider how God is using this
season in Elayne's life. As I noted, she is now much more conscious of
our presence, and thus much more aware when we're not in the room.
Indeed, I've noticed she's often much happier if we're in the same room
and she can just look over and see one or both of us. The other night,
she was in her jumper, and got turned around so she couldn't see me;
after a couple minutes, she started fussing: she couldn't figure out
where I had gone, and she hasn't yet developed an understanding of her
location well enough to realize that she could just turn around and see
me - so I turned her around, and sure enough, she stopped fussing
immediately.

Ellie is quietly asking - without the words she cannot use yet, but with
her actions and interactions - whether the people in her life love her,
are present for her, enjoy being with her, and will respond to her cries
for help. She's only a little under 15 weeks old, so all of this is
distinctly preverbal and she will consciously remember none of it. Yet
she is internalizing our responses to her as lessons for the rest of her
life. Her perception of the world - of her safety within it, of her
sense that she will be taken care of when she needs something, that she
is a joy to the people around her - these things will sink in deeply.

I suspect parents often underestimate the value of these early months.
The child is helpless and largely uninteractive. She cannot provide
"company", exactly, and while we can see her learning skills, those
intangibles are far less obvious. They are, however, equally important
to the other skills she's learning. The sense of happiness and security
she receives in this time will provide a baseline for the rest of her
life - a baseline she will never remember, and if which she willl never
be consciously aware, but a baseline nonetheless. Her view of the world,
her understanding of her place in it, is being shaped now in ways that
are only dimly apparent to us, but they matter! Oh, how they matter!

When she is 15, it will be easier for her to trust that we, and more
important, God, have her best interests in mind if we take care of her
well now. Will she think to herself, "I remember when I was 15 weeks
old, and my parents used to take care of me - surely this will be okay"?
Hardly. But the shape of her emotional response to the world will have
been changed, for good or ill, by the ways we interact with her now.

The interval between now and 15 years old matters immensely, too, of
course, but these early months lay the foundation on which that interval
will be built. We should recognize how much trust God has placed in us,
and use our time well and wisely. In the moments when it simply seems
too much, when she is simply frustrating us, we should remember: no, we
can't see how we're teaching her right now. But we're teaching her, and
she will carry these lessons for the rest of her life, whether she knows
it or not.

In this, as in so many areas of our lives, daily faithfulness matters.

  [Ellie in a jumper]: http://www.chriskrycho.com/family/files/2012/09/ellie_jumper.jpeg
    "ellie_jumper"
  [![Ellie in a jumper][]]: http://www.chriskrycho.com/family/files/2012/09/ellie_jumper.jpeg
