Title: Miscellanies in March
Date: 2012-03-16 11:19
Author: chriskrycho
Category: Updates
Tags: baby, books, entertainment, family, history, Jaimie, video games, vocation
Slug: miscellanies-in-march

I've been posting much less these past few weeks. Not a surprise; life
gets busy, and I've been pretty tired.

So has Jaimie; she saw the doctor for a pregnancy test, got some
bloodwork done, and found out she's anemic from the pregnancy.

Combine that with an offhand comment by a coworker, and some pieces of
my life snapped together. For a decade or so, I've had an incredibly
hard time staying awake when I'm bored. It started in 8th grade, and has
continued ever since. Boring class? Sleep. Boring sermon? Sleep. Boring
workday? Struggling not to fall asleep. I was notably anemic back when I
had mono - common enough, but possibly still true. <!--more-->

We're going to start by upping our iron intake with foods. (More
hamburgers and other red meat? Yes, please!)

If that doesn't do the trick, I'll be headed in to see a doctor.

In other news, Baby Girl is getting kind of huge, and still kicking up a
storm. It's pretty amazing to be able to see the effects on Jaimie's
skin as our little one kicks and stretches and pushes. I continue to be
amazed at the whole process. It is, I think, the single most
mind-boggling natural event in the world. From Jaimie and me comes an
entirely new *person*. That's hard to get my head around. She will have
her own likes and dislikes, her own personality (and a strong one, if
her parents are any indication), her own dreams and desires, and her own
quirks (more than a few, if her parents are any indication).

There will be ways she is like Jaimie and me. She'll probably look
something like a combination of us, though I think it's fair to hope she
looks more like Jaimie than me. The vagaries of genetics being what they
are, she could end up being a green-eyed redhead, though, and wouldn't
that be amusing? The probabilities, of course, lean toward a brown-eyed
brunette, and if she takes after her mother she'll be beautiful.

More and more I'm aware of how great our responsibility to her is and
will be; but more and more I'm also aware of how much is and will be out
of our hands. We can't keep her safe, even now; she's in God's hands.
The same will be true from the moment of her birth, forever. Nor can we
guarantee she'll come to Christ; nothing in our power will make that
happen. Only God can save people. The more the thought of our little
girl's life looms large in my mind, the more I fall back on the
assurance of God's sovereignty in salvation.

Other fun tidbits: Jaimie and I did the ridiculous (and wonderful) last
week in going to a midnight release of a beloved video game, and playing
it throughout the rest of the week. [Mass Effect 3][] is 99% pure
brilliance, and we profoundly enjoyed the experience, though that 1% was
such a headscratcher as to mar it and leave us talking for days in
annoyance. Amusingly, my Xbox 360 died as I was about to start the very
final section (last 15 minutes) of the game, and had to be replaced.
Alas.

I'm now working through [Catherine the Great: Portrait of a Woman][],
and finding it to be simultaneously fascinating and tragic. Two features
of the book have particularly caught my attention: the extravagance with
which Russian royalty lived in the mid 1700s, especially in contrast to
the Russian serfdom; and how readily our culture's obsession with
happiness infiltrates our views of marriage, in that it is easy to see
Catherine the Great's many affairs as justifiable in the context of her
idiotic and boorish husband. (I'll post on both of these at greater
length in a book response at Ardent Fidelity when I've finished the
book.)

I'm increasingly bemused by my love of history. As I began to recognize
while taking a World War II history class at OU, I *love* history.
Indeed, the various history classes I took tied with classical Greek as
the classes I found most purely *fun* in college; only one physics class
is in the same tier. More and more, the books I enjoy reading most are
history, from biographies to studies of battles to historical
sociolinguistics. All of it fascinates me. Considering the job prospects
of people graduating with history and classical language degrees, it's
probably best I didn't discover this passion until later.

A physics degree has been more profitable in opening various doors for
me, and I don't regret it for a moment. I loved the way it taught me to
approach problems and to think hard about the world, and I've no doubt
God will continue to use that education in surprising ways throughout my
life. I do wonder that I didn't realize earlier how much more I enjoyed
history, though. Then again, I didn't come to discover how much I loved
web design until around the time I was graduating, and it appears that
will be one major way I work to get through seminary. God's timing, it
is clear, is not ours.

We're now a little under two months away from the predicted arrival of
our baby girl, and only a little over four months away from heading to
Southeastern. Lots of changing coming up very quickly...

P.S. It is good to write. Good for my soul. I always forget that; I need
to remember it.

  [Mass Effect 3]: http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B004FYEZMQ/ref=as_li_ss_tl?ie=UTF8&tag=thafl-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=390957&creativeASIN=B004FYEZMQ
    "Mass Effect 3 @Amazon"
  [Catherine the Great: Portrait of a Woman]: http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0679456724/ref=as_li_ss_tl?ie=UTF8&tag=thafl-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=390957&creativeASIN=0679456724
    "Catherine the Great @Amazon"
