Title: Our past four weeks
Date: 2012-05-13 07:22
Author: chriskrycho
Category: Updates
Tags: baby, Jaimie, providence, transitions, vocation, work
Slug: our-past-four-weeks

This isn't just a photoblog, I promise! Not that you all mind pictures
of my beautiful wife too much, I think (nor will you mind pictures of
our beautiful daughter, methinks), but life updates are always in good
order as well. And there is plenty to say. <!--more-->

For starters, Jaimie was in a car accident almost a month ago. (Many of
you already know this, thanks to the incredibly rapid speed at which
information travels in our Facebook-connected age.) She was at what she
thought was a three-way stop, but which is in fact only a two-way stop,
and her car was hit from the side. Just like that, we were out a car and
on our way to the hospital to make sure everything was okay with our
baby girl.

<figure class="vertical">
![Jaimie's car after the accident][]

</figure>
And yes, it was definitely totaled. It's funny: you wouldn't necessarily
assume that, looking at the damage on the outside, but the impact
damaged the underlying frame, not just the door. On a unibody frame like
that on the Hyundai Elantra, that's a pretty good bet that you're headed
toward a total loss. Goodbye, La Bamba. (Jaimie named her car...)

As it turns out, the accident has proven a clear example of God's
providence in multiple ways. First, we went to the hospital to make sure
everything was okay with the baby. It was... but Jaimie was having
contractions, and they were regular, and they were getting stronger.
Jaimie had let herself get dehydrated, and one of the ways a pregnant
woman's body protects both itself and the baby is by going into labor
early if dehydrated. In other words: it's a good thing Jaimie had to go
to the hospital that day, because there's a good chance we'd have ended
up there anyway, but hours later and with a much higher chance of having
actual preterm labor. Praise God that Jaimie was in a car accident!

As I have mentioned to a number of people since then: I pray for Jaimie
and our baby's health and safety every morning as I drive to work. I do
not normally expect God to answer that sort of prayer with a car
accident - but he did, and the glory of His goodness was on full display
as he protected both of them *through* the accident.

We have a new car, now - bought in full, not a penny of debt on it. The
combination of insurance money and the blessing of considerable savings
meant it wasn't a major hit on us, but *wow*: what a great car! Jaimie
now has a good mom-vehicle, a 2002 Lexus RX300. It will, in fact, be a
much better momcar (and yes, that is a word now) than her old sedan
would have been.

<figure class="vertical">
![2002 Lexus RX300][]

</figure>
This, too, is a picture of God's providence: not only in the car itself,
but in the timing of my other wonderful piece of news: that I have a new
job I will be starting this coming Friday (as a software developer for
[Quest Consultants][]). I was in contact with my new employers before
the car accident happened, and at the time didn't appear to be quite the
right fit for them. They got back in touch with me the first week in May
and offered me a job last Friday. In the meantime, Jaimie had the car
accident - and we got the ball rolling on this new vehicle with one of
my current coworkers. Had my new employers been able to hire me when we
first talked, I would not have been in a position to buy this wonderful
new vehicle.

As I have often reminded our community group this year: God is
sovereignly orchestrating *all* things for our good and his glory.
Knowing that our good and his glory are perfectly united is an enormous
comfort - were they competing ends, we would be in a sore spot indeed.
Instead, we can be perfectly confident that in all things, God will get
glory *and* we will get good, because they are one and the same. So we
can glory in God's glory, and rest in his providence, because he is
orchestrating car accidents and the occasion of new employment and the
timing of every detail perfectly. These moments when it is clear are
rocks and anchors in the times when it is less apparent.

The weeks ahead will be busy and full of transition and probably al
ittle crazy. Our baby will arrive, I will change jobs (to one with a
5-minute commute instead of a 30-minute commute), and the rest of life
doesn't stop for either. It's always an adventure.

  [Jaimie's car after the accident]: http://www.chriskrycho.com/family/files/2012/05/totaled.jpeg
    "Totaled"
  [2002 Lexus RX300]: http://www.chriskrycho.com/family/files/2012/05/new_car.jpeg
    "New Car"
  [Quest Consultants]: http://www.questconsult.com/ "Quest Consultants"
