Title: Still on the planet. Mostly.
Date: 2012-08-05 08:09
Author: chriskrycho
Category: Updates
Tags: baby, Elayne, family, Jaimie, priorities, schedule, sleep
Slug: still-on-the-planet-mostly

The last few weeks, the pace hereabouts has picked up a bit again. My
web development consulting has stepped back up to the levels it was in
the months before Elayne was born, which is great, but it's an extra 10
hours every week (minimum) that I need to spend on things outside the
home. Add in get-togethers with friends each of the last two Saturday
evenings, celebrating our anniversary three weekends ago, and our normal
busy schedule, and you have a recipe for busyness.<!--more-->

For me, the busyness has been compounded by the choice I made early on
to make sure to give Jaimie time out where I take care of Elayne for
hours at a stretch so she can go work on her novel. Elayne's needs are
constantly changing; there have been points in the first 10 weeks (10
weeks already!) where Elayne mostly slept through that time, with
perhaps a need to be fed once in the middle or end of it. Not so these
past few weeks. She has gone through a fussy stage and a cute playful
stage, as well as a
adorable-if-you're-paying-attention-to-me-and-screaming-my-head-off-otherwise
stage. Both of the latter two have been pretty good on the whole, but of
course they involve lots of time spent keeping her happy.

Since she's adorable, that's not exactly a chore. It's a real joy to see
her cooing and playing and smiling. One of my favorite moments occurred
yesterday as I came into the apartment after working at the coffee shop
all day: I walked in, kissed Jaimie, and crouched down to say hi to
Ellie. She lit up and started cooing immediately as she saw me and heard
my voice. She loves me! Hooray!

In any case, I haven't exactly been able to get any work-like projects
done during those times when Jaimie is out for close to a month now, and
that compresses the rest of the week quite a bit. We're still figuring
out our schedule and how to balance all the pieces of our lives in a way
that keeps our priorities right. God first, then each other and Elayne,
then our church and vocations, and then everything else. The shape of
our schedule as we try to reflect those priorities week after week is
constantly in flux... because Elayne is always in flux!

Somewhere in the last few weeks, she decided she would mostly sleep
through the night. With rare exceptions, she's been sleeping for 6-8
hour stretches every evening. This has been great, especially for
Jaimie. Of course, it also means she has been hilariously wakeful
through much of the day! This has been delightful, too, by and large:
she's often in a great mood, and it's hard to top a happy baby for
making your own heart happy. It does entail far more time and attention
than her sleepy phases, though.

Of course, all of these sorts of changes are to be expected - though I
think most parents may not realize the shape of the attention-required
curve going in. Because of the sheer helplessness of newborn infants, it
is easy to expect that the first little while will be the most
time-consuming. This is probably not true in most cases, for one simple
reason: newborns just sleep all the time. Even Ellie sleeps less than
she will, and she certainly doesn't move around or try to stick random
things in her mouth yet. I suspect the next few years will have lots of
adventures for all of us.

And in all of it, we will continue to figure out the shape of our lives
as a family, because it's different. Less sleep looks likely, if I want
to keep producing anywhere near the amount of writing and side work I'm
currently committed to. Gladly, once we move someplace my allergies will
not be so bad, that should be easier to manage on a regular basis.

So that's life with us right now - in brief, of course. Tell us: how's
life with you?
