Title: This one takes the cake
Date: 2012-01-15 20:56
Author: chriskrycho
Category: Updates
Slug: this-one-takes-the-cake

They say pregnancy affects the brain. It's true. I have strong
evidentiary backing for this claim - all of it hilarious. A few weeks
into Jaimie's pregnancy, I began noticing the side effects - enough so
that at one point I sat down with her and said (humorously, but a with a
hint of pleading underneath), "My love, *please* try to keep thinking
through the pregnancy." It's been our running joke ever since, and we've
had our share of funny moments since then - but this one takes the
cake.<!--more-->

When I got back from a run, Jaimie put some water on to boil to make
instant rice while I took a quick shower. I got out of the shower, dried
off, and put some clothes on. Fifteen minutes, perhaps. I wandered out
of our bedroom, glanced at what Jaimie was doing on her computer, and
headed into the kitchen, looking forward to a hearty repast of
bean-and-rice burritos.

The rice water had almost entirely boiled away. Of the cup of water
Jaimie was boiling, there was less than a quarter cup remaining.
Naturally, I was curious - and to my incredulous query, Jaimie simply
responded, "Oh! I totally forgot about it!"

Thankfully, she hadn't started the rice.

Also, thankfully we take these things as a point of humor, because they
happen sometimes in life. I can't imagine how frustrating a marriage
would be if we didn't learn to just laugh and roll with the punches,
because life just *happens* to us on a regular basis. Whether it's
pregnancy-brain or my coming down with mononucleosis, too many things
are out of our control for us to take life - or ourselves - too
seriously.

The result, gladly, is a happy home with lots of laughter. Hopefully,
when our little girl joins us, she'll pick that up from us.
