Title: Three monthsâ€¦ and a rant
Date: 2012-09-02 08:03
Author: chriskrycho
Category: Updates
Tags: Christlikeness, Elayne, Jaimie, marriage, maturity, parenting, rants, selfishness, selflessness
Slug: three-months-and-a-rant

Elayne is 14 weeks old today; she was 3 months old last Monday.

How time flies! Run through this much time 71 more times, and she'll be
18: a strange thought, to be sure. Yes, that's a lot of repetitions, but
if they all go this quickly... well, it's obvious that it won't
necessarily *seem* that long. I begin to understand my parents' comments
about how quickly we all grew up.

Begin, I say, because of course Ellie is only 3 months old. She's cooing
and laughing and starting to put things in her mouth and trying to roll.
She gets happy when Mommy or Daddy enter the room, or come back after
hours away at work, or put her where she can watch us while we're
cooking, or talk to her, or really do just about anything with her.
<!--more-->

Except when she's inconsolably fussy - which, seeing as she's a baby,
happens. Sometimes there is simply nothing we can do to make her happy.
She would love to tell us exactly what she needs, I'm sure; we would
love to know exactly what she needs so we can help her. (Of course,
sometimes all she needs is to stop crying and go to sleep, because she's
crying because she's overtired. These times are simultaneously hilarious
and frustrating.)

I can see how people would find that children pull them apart in
marriage, but I also see that (as with much of life) it depends on our
focus. If we are consistently aiming to put Christ at the center, to
love each other well, and to act as a team toward Ellie - taking the
burden off of each other, even at cost to ourselves - our marriage is
actually stronger. As Jaimie commented a few weeks ago: our
communication is better now; our relationship is healthier now; our
marriage is richer now. Ellie has made us closer, not drawn us apart.

Again: it's easy to see how it happens, just as it's easy to see how
money can be contentious. Marriage and parenting make quite apparent how
destructive selfish behavior is; they also highlight how powerful
Christlike selflessness is. We're far from perfect at it, of course, but
even to be aiming at it - to therefore actively repent and apologize to
one another when we fail - makes all the difference in the world. I
cannot imagine how difficult a marriage aimed at our own
self-satisfaction would be.

It is one of the beautiful ironies of life that only a marriage aimed at
each other's happiness rather than our own has any chance of producing
true happiness. Likewise, only parenting that is willing to set the
child's good above one's own can leave us glad at the end of the day.
Relationships are hard work; taking care of a child is hard work. Yet
they are both the best kind of hard work.

I feel I ought to mention something that's been niggling at me for a
while: the more time I have spent married, and (so far) the more time I
have spent as a father, the more frustrated I get with our culture's
typical attitude toward marriage - and I mean our church culture as well
as our secular culture. The latter I expect to view both selfishly, to
see marriage as a trap and children as a burden. The former however,
ought to see both as God does: truly good. Too often, instead, we act as
though having children means your life is effectively over. This is
simply nonsense. (It is, perhaps, reflective of our tendency to worship
family and idolize our children.)

Likewise, the idea that somehow we need to be at a given point of
selflessness and maturity before we marry or have children reflects a
certain worldly wisdom, but it misses the mark entirely in my view.
Selflessness is a commitment, by and large, not a state of being. We
grow in selflessness by choosing to be selfless, plain and simple. If we
are always waiting to arrive at some magical point, we will never be
there. Marriage and children give us opportunities to exercise that
choice, perhaps more frequently and profoundly than ever before - but
saying "I'm not selfless enough yet" is really another way of saying "I
don't want to make that hard choice yet," which simply perpetuates the
problem.

Maturity is important, it is true. Trajectory is *more* important,
though: all the maturity in the world means little if we are stagnant or
(worse!) going backwards; and all the immaturity in the world means
little (not nothing, but little) if we are wholeheartedly seeking God
and godliness.

This is not to say that everyone must immediately seek to have children
upon getting married. It is, however, to utterly reject our culture's
view of children as burdensome and our tendency to resent the demands
they make of us. It is to aim at Christlike dying to self every day
whether or not we are married, whether or not we have children, so that
should God choose to bless us with a spouse or a(nother) child, we will
find it a cause for rejoicing and an opportunity to continue growing as
we already are.

Rant over! I now return to my regularly schedule business of heading out
the door for worship practice on this lovely Sunday morning. A post with
pictures to follow sometime this week.
