Title: Trying to Help
Date: 2012-10-07 17:44
Author: chriskrycho
Category: Updates
Tags: Elayne, fatherhood, growing up, maturity, picture
Slug: trying-to-help

Last night we had over our dear friends Cody and [Laura Piersall][] to
watch [<cite>The Avengers</cite>][]. Of course, Elayne's bedtime came
somewhere in the middle, so Jaimie and I traded off trying to put her
down.

It was an interesting task, to say the very least. She was clearly not
interested in going to sleep - too many interesting noises, not to
mention those other people out there in the living room! - and she also
decided to be doubly difficult in her approach to eating.

<figure class="vertical" style="text-align: center">
![Ellie smiling at her toys][]  

<figcaption>
This adorable thing, difficult? Unbelievable!

</figcaption>
</figure>
<!--more-->One, for reasons mysterious to us, Ellie has decided to
sometimes go completely crazy and whip her head toward our chest while
eating from a bottle. She does this whether it's Jaimie feeding her or
me, so it doesn't *seem* to be nursing-related. Needless to say, this
makes it difficult to get her to actually eat all her food: she's
constantly moving her mouth away from the bottle, and not eating a bit
while she is in this pattern. I eventually just held the bottle in the
same spot until she got the idea that whipping her head back and forth
wasn't going to produce the results for which she was looking. Combined
with letting her stand up and play at intervals, we finally got some
progress.

The other challenge comes in because Ellie has decided she's big enough
to hold her bottle and feed herself. Anytime Jaimie or I are feeding her
with the bottle, she puts her hands on it and tries to hold it in place.
The results are simultaneously hilarious and frustrating. You see, she
is apparently convinced she can do this... but she actually can't, yet.
She lacks the motor control to be able to hold the bottle in her mouth.

The result is actually rather the opposite of her intent: she's
constantly knocking the bottle out of her mouth; for us to keep the
bottle in her mouth involves either the application of a great deal of
force to the bottle to hold it in position (no one's favorite, including
Ellie), or to trap her arms (also not Ellie's idea of a good time) so
that she can actually get some food in her stomach. Option 3, which I
took last night, is to let her "help" and just deal with the extra
difficulty it causes along the way. Not *always* the best option, but
sometime's it not a bad idea.

<figure class="vertical" style="text-align: center">
![Ellie eating 'real food' the first time][]  

<figcaption>
Ellie eating "real" food for the first time

</figcaption>
</figure>
Here's why: it's true that Elayne can't actually hold the bottle in her
mouth yet. It's true that in fact, her attempts to hold the bottle are
more counterproductive than anything else. But she's learning, and
that's the *most* important thing at the moment. Yes, it takes longer
for her to get her food that way, but there's more going on than simply
her getting food: she's also developing her physical skills, the sorts
of things that are so internalized for us that we no longer think about
them.

Of course, as is so often the case, this led me to ponder the ways in
which God must deal with the same sort of inability on our behalf,
magnified manyfold. We are quick to try to "help" him with the
situations in our lives, and in our good intentions no doubt we make
things worse for ourselves and others than they might have been; we no
doubt cause his tasks in our life to take longer than if we were to let
him simply do for us what we need. But of course, he bears with us for
precisely the same reasons we bear with Elayne: we *need* to learn how
to walk with him, and though our attempts along the way are often
unhelpful, he is gracious and we do learn.

So we'll keep bearing with Ellie as she is trying to help, and watch
with joy as she grows into maturity. Someday she *will* be holding that
bottle without my help, and it will be good!

  [Laura Piersall]: http://laurapiersall.blogspot.com/
  [<cite>The Avengers</cite>]: http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B0083SBJXS/?tag=krycho-20
    "Buy it at Amazon and help put the Krychos through seminary!"
  [Ellie smiling at her toys]: http://2012-2013.chriskrycho.com/family/files/2012/10/155106_4763735381979_402869975_n.jpeg
    "Ellie smiling at her toys"
  [Ellie eating 'real food' the first time]: http://2012-2013.chriskrycho.com/family/files/2012/10/2012-09-27_17-37-57_626.jpeg
    "Ellie eating 'real food' the first time"
