Title: Don't call it a soft launch...
Date: 2012-01-12 05:32
Author: chriskrycho
Category: Posts
Tags: God's glory, site news, writing
Slug: a-soft-launc

#### ...even if that's what this is

As I launch a new theology blog, I thought it might be helpful to
outline (for myself as well as my at least initially few readers) my
approach here. I aim to write broadly, addressing a wide number of
topics here, but they will always be viewed through the lens of the
glory of God in Christ - a phrase from Thomas Schreiner I am
increasingly fond of.<!--more-->

As far as my own writing here goes, I expect to have two main kinds of
content: regular blog posts and longer articles. The regular blog posts
will be less structured and more on-the-fly - which is to say,
traditional blog posts: a bit off the cuff, a bit more like thinking out
loud. The articles, by contrast, will be more carefully developed and
organized, and will reflect aspects of theology I *have* thought through
at least a little, as opposed to things I *am* thinking through. The
other, more basic differences will likely be length and visual: blog
posts will be a bit shorter and considerably less likely to be visually
outlined with various subheaders than full articles.

As to why I'm taking that approach, it gives me the freedom to write
both the sorts of longer, more carefully pieces I am sometimes drawn to
*and* the more meandering but typically shorter musings that have been
the bread and butter of my blogging over the past half decade. Hopefully
the clear distinction between the two will be of some service to my
readers as well as to myself. (And hopefully my readers won't be turned
off by the semi-regularity with which I anticipate posting so-called
ordinary blog posts in or upwards of the thousand-word-count marker.
Those articles I'm referencing? They'll be substantially longer than
that...)

Other content you can expect to see here: book reviews, both of the long
and short variety. I'll need to come up with a good name for the shorter
ones, while treating longer ones as full reviews. Responses, perhaps? We
will see whenever I get around to writing my first. In any case, I hope
to write a response or review for every new book I read; I think that
will help me to stop and think about what I have read. (As quickly as I
read, being forced to slow down and ponder a bit before moving on is
very good for me.)

I will also share provocative, challenging, and encouraging quotes as I
come across them. Similarly, I will put up links to other blog posts and
articles that I think will be beneficial to my readers as I come across
them.

Finally, when I begin my seminary studies this coming fall, I expect to
be writing a fair number of academic papers, and I will share those as
well (the good ones, at least!).

I don't expect *all* of those things to be interesting to anyone, but I
hope that *each* of them is interesting to *someone*. In any case, I
know that I will find benefit simply in the exercise of my mental
faculties. As has been the case for many greater luminaries who have
gone before, I find that writing sharpens my thinking and provokes me to
deeper thought. (And, of course, it is *fun*.)

So with that, we're off. May God use this blog for his glory and our
good!
