Title: A Theology of Vocation
Date: 2012-02-11 23:43
Author: chriskrycho
Category: Posts
Tags: delight, evangelicalism, God's glory, Reformation, vocation
Slug: a-theology-of-vocation

It has become increasingly apparent to me over the past three to five
years that evangelicalism suffers from a serious deficit of careful
thought to our theology of vocation. Though evangelicals pay lip service
to the notion that every believer's work is valuable in the sight of
God, in practice we do not *act* as though this is true. We do not, deep
down, seem to actually believe that working as a software engineer or an
electrician or a clerk or a manager or a lawyer or even a doctor is
really important and God-honoring. Or at least, not as much as doing
*ministry*. <!--more-->

This takes two forms. First is the overt emphasis on the work of people
who are vocational ministers, whether pastors, missionaries, college
ministers, or others. I cannot count the number of godly young men and
women I know who, simply because they have a passion for God and a heart
to lead others, are directed into one or another of these forms of
ministry. Though this is not all bad, and I am glad that many of my
acquaintances are in these roles, I wonder: ought we assume that simply
because someone loves the things of God, they ought to make their
*vocation* full-time ministry?

And I have an answer: no. We should not assume that everyone who
passionately loves God and his word is called to vocational ministry;
quite the contrary. That we *do* assume this reveals just how little we
honor other paths.

One of the men who most profoundly influenced my outlook on the world
served as the primary teacher in my youth group throughout my teen
years. He taught us *how* to study scripture and *why*, he modeled for
us a passion for truth and a bedrock commitment to the authority of the
Bible, he demonstrated the power of a prayer life saturated through with
the word of God, and he called us to follow him in loving God with all
our heart, soul, mind and strength. He never received a penny for any of
this.

Though he was and is a profoundly wise, biblically knowledgeable, and
godly man, he made it a priority *not* to go into vocational ministry.
Now, to ordinary evangelical ears, this sounds strange, even silly. Here
we have a man who loves the word of God, is a skilled teacher and has
made an enormous difference in the lives of everyone he has taught, who
steadfastly *refuses* to become a paid minister. What in the world could
motivate him?

From what I know of the reasons behind his decision, I think he is
absolutely on the right track, and I wish others could grasp what he
has. Years ago, he commented to me that one of the reasons that he has
not chosen to become a full-time pastor is because, by remaining where
he is in the workplace as a network administrator, he can have an
equally great impact for the kingdom. How? By demonstrating to everyone
around him that one does *not* have to be a vocational minister to lead
a life dedicated to the glory of God, to passionately pursue
righteousness, to be set apart for something higher than the petty aims
of this fallen world.

Because of this commitment, he has had many opportunities through the
years to share Christ with coworkers who might never have otherwise
heard, and to challenge fellow believers to walk more potently with God.
His example serves to repudiate all those who think that really
effective gospel proclamation and exhortation is done best by someone
being paid to that end.

Equally importantly, though, *he has had a chance to do good work to the
glory of God*. Here is the other way we evangelicals have diminish
non-ministerial vocations: we forget that they have value apart from
their opportunities to proclaim the gospel. The work *itself* is
valuable in the sight of God.

The Reformers understood this concept, as did many of their Puritan
progeny. Indeed, one of the great triumphs of the Reformation was its
recovery of and insistence on a full-orbed theology of work. The
structures of the Roman Catholic church had, intentionally or otherwise
(a discussion for another time), set a clear demarkation between secular
and sacred tasks. The priesthood was for those who wished to truly serve
God; everyone else had tasks that were perhaps necessary but certainly
not glorious.

The Reformers formulated a radically different view, one founded in the
creation mandate itself. They noted that Adam was not forced to work as
punishment for his sin, but given work God before the Fall. They noted
that every task, no matter how ignoble, could honor God when done with a
joyful heart that saw the task as a gift from the Creator and an
opportunity to praise the Savior. They believed that every ploughboy was
of equal worth - and his *job* of equal worth - to any priest.

Yes, some tasks are more obviously spiritually meaningful. Some tasks
have more weight and import about them. Yet the fact that being a
political leader, for example, has more responsibility and greater
consequence for the lives of others than does being a graphic designer
does *not* belittle the latter. Worldly weight and import are not the
same as real importance. God has created us each in his image, and we
are all called to reflect his glory in unique ways - the man who manages
a McDonald's no less than the President of the United States. No task is
so menial that it may not glorify God, and no task is so magnificent
that it may not be ultimately meaningless.

Evangelicals have long embraced a (thoroughly American) tendency to
reduces people to their jobs and their jobs to their measurable impact.
That in our case the "measurable impact" is simply the number of times
in a given week we share the gospel - however well or poorly, and
however badly we may be doing our actualy job along the way - does not
change the sad reality that we have bought the lies of our culture. Jobs
are good in and of themselves; they honor God themselves, not merely as
means to other God-honoring ends.

Finally, I suspect there is a third, less abstract reason that we
struggle with this. For many of us, work is *not* a source of joy, and
we can little comprehend how God would be honored in our drudgery. Too
many of us have come to believe - whether because of our own sinful ways
of thinking or because of the awful jobs we have to work - that work
itself is a bad thing. We idolize our time off. And yet, speaking from
experience born of infectious mononucleosis, I can affirm that we *need*
work. Anyone who thinks sitting at home playing video games for a month
would be nothing but fun has never had to experience it.

Making and doing are integral parts of the way we humans are built. We
are not meant to be static or relaxed all the time; we are designed to
work, and when we are unable to or choose not to work, we eventually
waste away. That some people's jobs are awful, unfulfilling things that
can cause their own blend of misery points not to the badness of work
but to the cost of the Fall.

We evangelicals need to recover a robust, truly Christ-shaped vision of
work and vocation. We need to remember that we were made to work before
evil ever entered the world, and that we will likely be working for the
glory of God when evil has been banished for good. And it will be good.
