Title: Epitaph: Write This On My Grave Stone
Date: 2012-08-26 21:26
Author: chriskrycho
Category: Posts
Tags: family, God's glory, Jesus, legacy, life, ministry
Slug: epitaph-write-this-on-my-grave-stone

When they put a headstone over my grave, I hope they chisel on it, "He
proclaimed the supremacy of Jesus Christ in all things, and he lived
like he meant it."

If I die having spent every day proclaiming - to my family, to my
friends, to my coworkers, to my neighbors, to everyone I can – that
Jesus is the center of everything, that the Triune Godhead is the point
of all existence, it will be a good thing. If I do so having lived in
such a way that no one can say I did not mean it, it will be a better
thing.<!--more-->

I’m not sure it could yet be said of me. I’m timid, too often, to speak
Jesus' name to the nonbelievers I know - for fear of what others will
think, for worry that it will drive away those I want to win to Christ.
Thick irony, yes? I’m afraid to speak the name of Christ to those who
need him most because I worry it will keep them from coming to Christ.
There is something wrong with this picture.

That something is the fear of man. It is, in other words, a quiet
refutation of that which I profess so believe, that which I want
chiseled on my tombstone. I may believe that Jesus Messiah is indeed the
center of all things. But as the apostle James
<cite class="bibleref" title="James 2:19">so incisively notes</cite>:
"You believe that God is one; you do well. Even the demons believe - and
shudder!" If my life does not show the evidence of my profession, what
am I saying about my profession?

I recognize already that there is danger for those who pursue ministry.
Too many men walking the road I follow have sacrificed their families,
have chased after fame and wealth and success, have let anything and
everything lead them astray from their first love, for me to come at it
cavalierly. God forbid - truly, God forbid! - that I should stray thus!
If I am going to faithfully proclaim Christ's supremacy over all things,
I must *live* in such a way that his supremacy in my life is
unmistakable.

That is not to say that I must live perfectly. Were it so, I would quit
the endeavor immediately; such a thing is beyond any of us. No, a truly
Christ-centered life is one that aims to glorify him in everything. And
since I will fail at that aim, I pray that when I sin, at least my
repentance will point others to him. To live our lives with Jesus
supreme does not mean we do not stumble; it means that we take even our
stumblings as opportunities to magnify him.

So when I snap at Jaimie, I pray I will be swift to apologize. When I am
impatient with Ellie, I pray I will be swift to show contrition so that
she will see the face of Jesus more clearly. When I embrace my own
pride, I pray I will be swift to repent and humble myself publicly, that
my life might not put Jesus to shame.

By the grace of God, in the power of his indwelling spirit, I will
chisel the supremacy of Christ across every aspect of my life - no less
my failures than my victories - so that when I die, it will be a fitting
epitaph: Christ the center of all things, and especially this man's
life.
