Title: Firebrand Preaching: A Call for Exultation and Exhortation
Date: 2012-05-24 08:00
Author: chriskrycho
Category: Posts
Tags: application, delight, exhortation, explanation, exultation, information, preaching, worship
Slug: firebrand-preaching-a-call-for-exultation-and-exhortation

Martyn Lloyd-Jones once famously defined preaching as “logic on fire.” I
am afraid that in most churches, the preaching is more like logic in
tepid bathwater, or emotional claptrap on fire. Neither is particularly
helpful.

In the church circles I frequent, preachers have the logic part down. I
might have a quibble here or there with an interpretive point, but these
are quibbles and matters of personal taste. These pastors recognize the
importance of truth and labor to communicate that truth to the
congregation. Praise God for pastors who care that their congregations
apprehend the truths of Scripture, and who care that the men and women
in the seats walk away with some idea of how to put God’s commands into
practice.

In my experience, though, the other half of Lloyd-Jones’ equation often
goes missing. <!--more-->We have humor in spades and interesting
anecdotes in surplus. That is, on the whole, a good thing: boring
sermons are an offense to the hearer. But where is the fire? Where is
the passion, the sense of urgency, the fervency of the preacher’s
declarations and appeals?

One might suppose that a preacher’s task is primarily to deliver
information; this is true, but woefully incomplete. A lecture, like a
sermon, is designed to deliver information, perhaps even to inspire an
audience to commit to some change. A sermon, however, is not merely a
lecture; it includes the delivery of information with the aim of
changing the hearer, and it is an act of corporate worship in which the
audience should participate. Because a sermon is an act of corporate
worship, we *must* go beyond mere information delivery.

Most sermons in evangelical church culture are structured in terms of
explanation and application; this is as it should be. Unfortunately,
most sermons in our church culture never get beyond explanation and
application – this is *not* as it should be.

Where we often settle for explanation – simply stating what the text
says and means – we need *exultation*. We need pastors who revel in the
truth revealed by Scripture, who savor the profound realities of our
salvation, who visibly delight in our great God and Savior. Explanation
is necessary; but exultation subsumes it and directs both preaching and
listening into acts of worship. When the pastor worships as he explains,
the congregation learns to worship – and worships right along with him.
Exultation requires that he not only understand the passage he is
preaching, but also feel the weight of the glory of God. I don’t mean
some faux emotionalism, but a passion for God that comes from meditating
on him as revelead in the scriptures.

Likewise, we settle for mere application when we need *exhortation*.
Again: we need to hear how that truth is applicable to the Christian’s
life. However, there is a world of difference between the bare statement
of fact and a heartfelt exhortation. Mere application contents itself
with, “So, we see that the Christian life looks like this. Let’s all
think about how we might grow in that this week.” Exhortation, by
contrast, reaches out and grabs the listener with the force of the
pastor’s sense that his congregation needs this truth. “Christian!”
cries this pastor, “you must believe this every day! You must shape your
life like this – the work and the very nature of God demand it of us.”
The source of this urgency is twofold: meditation on God himself, and
close relationships with the people of the church. No pastor can
emphasize his congregation’s needs when he hardly knows his people.

You know a sermon that exults and exhorts when you hear it. Every
pastor’s delivery will be different, of course. Exultation and
exhortation are not a matter of style – as though a particular approach
to public speaking were the issue. But there will be a common thread, a
sense that the pastor feels this truth in his bones and that he knows
you need to feel the truth as profoundly as he does. As a modern
example, compare the preaching of John Piper, Matt Chandler, and David
Platt. These men could hardly be more different in style, in tone, in
delivery – but in each of them you can hear their passion for God and
their urgent desire to stir up their congregations. Style matters
little; firebrand preaching requires his veins to pump with urgency for
his people and delight in God.

The sermon is more than a lecture; we need more than information. We
need explanation and application, yes, but we need them transformed by
holy delight and pastoral concern. We need to be challenged and
encouraged, and we need to be led to worship together. We need
exhortation and exultation. We need *fire*.

*Note: this post was cross-posted to [Pillar on the Rock][], an online
magazine I started with [PJ King][] a couple years ago. We don't post
often there, but this post definitely fits... in fact, I started writing
this post for that site!*

  [Pillar on the Rock]: http://www.pillarontherock.com/2012/05/firebrand-preaching-call-for-exultation.html
  [PJ King]: http://www.pillarontherock.com/p/editors.html#PJ
    "PJ's profile"
