Title: The Gospel vs. Ethnocentrism: Jesus Wins
Date: 2012-04-02 08:00
Author: chriskrycho
Category: Posts
Tags: church, ethnicity, ethnocentrism, gospel, race, reconciliation
Slug: gospel-vs-ethnocentrism-jesus-wins

Readers may have noticed a bit of a trend in the last few quotes I've
posted here: they orient on race. I've been increasingly aware of the
role of race in our churches - and particularly, of just how poorly
American evangelicals have handled race issues - over the past year or
so. PJ King [tackled the topic][] for Pillar on the Rock back when we
were still writing regularly there, and I think his thoughts on history
and trajectory are accurate and important.

In the interval between then and now, I've spent a fair amount of time
reading various books and blogs that have highlighted in equally various
ways just how central the issue of ethnic diversity is to true gospel
ministry. <!--more-->On the one hand, I've had a good amount of push
from N. T. Wright in reading [<cite>The Resurrection of the Son of
God</cite>][], which is great scholarship and great apologetics, but
also includes some of Wright's really solid thinking on the ways that
the gospel undercuts any claims of ethnic superiority. On the other
hand, I've been reading Thabiti Anyabwile's blog for a couple years, and
he's had multiple occasions to tackle racially charged issues in our own
very modern theological and cultural context in the last 15 months. It's
been helpful for me to get perspective from a theologically conservative
black pastor who does not hesitate to identify strongly with the broader
black community. (If you're interested, some of the articles I found
most eye-opening were [Collateral Damage in the Invitation of T.D. Jakes
to The Elephant Room][], [This Black Leader or That Black Leader?][],
and [Where Does Blackness and Whiteness Come From?"][]) A number of
other sources have prompted me to be thinking about this more, from a
conversation with dear friends and mentors working as college ministers
at OU to the recent and ongoing furor about the death of Trayvon Martin.

I'm increasingly convinced that white evangelicals have turned a blind
eye to the facts that white racism still exists, albeit in subtler ways
than it once did, and that we have just as great a responsibility as our
black brothers and sisters to mend the damage done by our forebears. No
doubt some will be quick to point out that there is plenty of black
racism against white people, to which I simply say: yes, and so what?
What has that to do with *you*? Others' sin does not excuse our failure
to fully pursue the sort of ethnic reconciliation and unity that are -
or at least, ought to be - characteristic of Christians.

When Paul wrote, "Here there is not Greek and Jew, circumcised and
uncircumcised, barbarian, Scythian, slave, free; but Christ is all, and
in all" (Colossians 3:11) and again, "There is neither Jew nor Greek,
there is neither slave nor free, there is no male and female, for you
are all one in Christ Jesus. And if you are Christ's, then you are
Abraham's offspring, heirs according to promise" (Galatians 3:28-29), he
certainly did not simply forget to add "except where it's made humanly
impossible because of the effects of sin in our history." To the
contrary, his audience was composed of a mix of Jews and Gentiles; that
is, people who rather famously despised one another. Jews had long
considered themselves religiously superior to Gentiles, and observant
Jews would not even eat with Gentiles. (Sound familiar?) Gentiles,
meanwhile, considered Jews culturally backwards and religiously odd, and
generally wanted nothing to do with them.

In other words, Paul wasn't writing to people for whom ethnic
reconciliation was easy. It was hard, and it caused enormous conflict in
the early church as godly men and women worked through the travails
inherent in overcoming centuries of resentment and hatred. Even Peter
fell prey to peer pressure to conform to old ethnocentric patterns of
behavior.

So the fact that there is plenty of racism coming from blacks toward
whites - and there is - means not a whit more from a gospel vantage
point than the quiet racism so many whites maintain, consciously or
otherwise. And yes, to top it all off, we have our own sometimes
overlapping and sometimes wildly divergent theological, ecclesiastical
and cultural practices which can make building an ethnically diverse
community vastly more difficult than attacking the same problem with a
more homogeneous group of people. Again: so what?

God has not given us a choice whether to work at ethnic reconciliation.
The particular history of skin color-based slavery, discrmination, and
prejudice we encounter in the United States does not trump Scripture's
declarations and commands. God has not left the hard work of building
ethnically integrated churches - and not just black and white mingling,
but Latinos and Koreans and people of every skin color and every
language - for places where it is easy. To the contrary. Where would the
glorious, all-reconciling love of Christ be more powerfully displayed
than in the places where the sinful hate of fellow men has been most
pronounced?

White believers must work, and work hard, to understand that the
minority experience is *not* the same as the majority experience (and
that this difference is not necessarily the fault of the minority!);
that white attitudes toward other people often remain intellectually or
emotionally paternalistic; that what may seem a harmless gesture in
white culture may seem hostile, rude, or simply ignorant in other
cultures; that by dint of being a majority we are often blind to the
particular oddities of our own culture. (Fish, as it turns out, do not
particularly notice water as they swim in it, any more than you or I
notice air - or our own culture - unless we are paying unusually close
attention.)

We need to stop seeing our own culture as paramount and embrace the
diversity God intended the church to represent. We need to have the
humility to ask for help from our minority friends, and then to take it
when it is offered. We also need to recognize that there are theological
reserves of wisdom born of the suffering that minority groups have
endured from which we could benefit enormously. We need to learn to
speak other cultures' languages - both literally and metaphorically. We
need to persevere through our own mistakes and through those of other
cultures; no more taking studied disinterest or even as an excuse to
take our ball and go home when Christ has called us to play ball until
he comes back for us all.

On the flipside, minority groups need to recognize that racial or ethnic
identity must come *second* to identity in Christ. The natural response
to a minority position in society is to hold tightly to that identity.
(Plenty of white people really can identify with this experience, albeit
to a far lesser extent; nearly everyone has experienced the pain of
being excluded or overlooked on the basis of some characteristic and
bonding with others who share that experience.) The biblical response is
to reject that sort of insularism. Whereas our majority culture needs to
take off its blinders and see that other cultures not only exist but are
equally valuable, minority cultures must recognize that the majority
culture, too, has something to offer - and that in Christ, differing
cultures are no longer at war, but mutually work for the glory of God.
Minority culture believers must be patient with majority culture
believers as they struggle to gain a new perspective.

More than this, minority Christians in the US need to examine their own
hearts on the question of ethnic relationships as whites do. It is too
easy to simply blame the majority for every ethnic conflict, but the
reality is that ethnocentrism is a ready temptation for black people
just as certainly as it is for white people.

Above all, we all of us need to get one thing clear: Jesus trumps
ethnicity, old wounds, and history. The price he paid to unite us is too
great for us to simply dismiss real ethnic reconciliation and
integration as "too much work." The gospel leaves no room for racism.
And yes, it is hard work - impossibly difficult for mere men and mere
women to accomplish, but praise God that we are no longer mere men and
mere women. We are indwelt by the same Spirit that raised Jesus Christ
from the dead, who has already regenerated our dead and rebellious
hearts, and who will some day raise our bodies to glory as well. His
power is more than sufficient to accomplish the reconciliation that lies
so far beyond our reach.

  [tackled the topic]: http://www.pillarontherock.com/2010/11/race-and-church-series.html
    "Race and the Church"
  [<cite>The Resurrection of the Son of God</cite>]: http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0800626796/ref=as_li_ss_tl?ie=UTF8&tag=thafl-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=390957&creativeASIN=0800626796
    "Buy @Amazon"
  [Collateral Damage in the Invitation of T.D. Jakes to The Elephant
  Room]: http://thegospelcoalition.org/blogs/thabitianyabwile/2011/10/01/collateral-damage-in-the-invitation-of-t-d-jakes-to-the-elephant-room/
  [This Black Leader or That Black Leader?]: http://thegospelcoalition.org/blogs/thabitianyabwile/2012/01/24/this-black-leader-or-that-black-leader/
  [Where Does Blackness and Whiteness Come From?"]: http://thegospelcoalition.org/blogs/thabitianyabwile/2012/01/26/where-does-blackness-and-whiteness-come-from/
