Title: On Missions and Parachurch Ministries
Date: 2012-02-29 09:01
Author: chriskrycho
Category: Posts
Tags: church, evangelism, gospel, missions, parachurch ministries
Slug: on-missions-and-parachurch-ministries

### Missions and churches

Missions is not simply evangelism; it necessarily entails planting local
churches. Consider: in every city where Paul preached, he established
local congregations of believers. The New Testament, as has often been
pointed out, does not know of "lone wolf" believers; its authors simply
assumed that all believers are parts of local congregations. Nearly all
of the New Testament letters are written to churches; those that are
written to individuals are nonetheless written to individuals deeply
embedded in the affairs of local churches.

When we consider the task of modern missions, then, it is clear that we
should not just focus on evangelizing. We must also see to the second
task: building healthy churches. <!--more-->I praise God that the last
several decades have included a clear acknowledgement that we cannot
simply lead people to Christ and then leave them. We are called to a
much more thorough process of *disciple-making*, in which we lead people
after Christ not simply in a single moment but for their whole lives. We
have not always recognized, however, that this task cannot be sensibly
accomplished outside the context of local churches.

The last few centuries saw an explosion of missionary zeal in the United
States (following in the footsteps of earlier missions movement such as
those pioneered by the Moravians and many English missions). These were
largely church-planting movements. Men such as William Carey and Hudson
Taylor went to other nations preaching the gospel, and then building up
the churches that sprang up from the Spirit's work. This was as it
should be.

### Another need, another solution

In the 20th century, responding to a perceived lack of evangelistic
ministry and training on college campuses, a number of parachurch
organizations sprung up in the United States, including the Navigators,
Young Life and Campus Crusade (now named Cru). These ministries aimed to
lead people to Christ and help them commit to basic spiritual
disciplines, from prayer to memorizing Scripture. They generally
understood their role to be one of reaching and equipping young men and
women to serve in their local churches.

Broadly speaking, I think these sorts of ministries can be and have been
enormously beneficial as long as they keep their priorities straight. As
a dear friend on staff with InterVarsity commented, parachurch
ministries are fantastic, as long as they remember they are
*bridesmaids*, whose only job is to make the bride - the church - look
good. As soon as they try to be the center of attention, everything
turns into a giant mess. (I have written at greater length on the
relationship between churches and parachurch organizations
[elsewhere][], if you're interested.)

As noted, these organizations initially focused on spiritual training
for young adults. Over time, however, their ministries broadened. Cru,
for example, now has ministries ranging from college campuses to
marriage conferences ([Family Life][]) and long-term missionaries
embedded in other cultures. Many of these newer ministries are fantastic
- things that churches would be hard pressed to accomplish, and
potentially very beneficial to local churches. When Cru or any other
interdenominational parachurch ministry heads into unchurched areas and
starts doing missions work, though, I see trouble brewing.

These organizations' greatest strength in churched contexts is also
their greatest weakness in unchurched contexts: they are
interdenominational entities supported by a variety of churches and
denominations. In a place with many churches this allows them to support
and partner with existing communities of believers and fulfill their
primary function of making the Bride look good. In unchurched contexts,
however, this is a permanent liability.

### What sort of church, exactly?

Again: the task of missions goes beyond evangelism; it also entails
planting churches. Believers are not meant to be converted and then
exist in some nebulous post-conversion state in which they perhaps know
a few other believers but do not have a church. We desperately need the
commitment, leadership and community uniquely available in a local
church, with its elders and deacons and a congregation that meets
together regularly. Local *forms* of church may look very different, but
that we meet in *churches* is a fixed expectation from Scripture.

And exactly what sort of church would Cru, for example, plant? Its staff
and its supporters hail from nearly every conservative Christian
denomination conceivable. Its long-term workers are not and cannot be
empowered to plant churches, because *any* church they planted would be
a source of strife or conflict with of their donors. When your
organization is supported spiritually and financially by Baptists,
Presbyterians, Methodists, Congregationalists, Bible churches,
Lutherans, Pentecostals, and right on down the list, it is impossible to
plant a church. Too many distinctives have to be decided up front, from
leadership structure to practice of the ordinances (and even whether
they are ordinances or sacraments).

So while Cru and other parachurch organizations' long-term embedded
missions seem like a good idea at first blush - after all, who would say
that spreading the gospel to all nations is bad? - on closer
examination, I think they're a recipe for trouble. What converts they do
make (and praise God that they are leading people to Christ in places
where He is not known!) will be left adrift in one of the most important
ways. Yes, they can receive some discipleship from parachurch ministers,
and yes, they may potentially find some community with other believers
converted the same way. But they will not have the one thing they need
most: *ecclesia*, a church, a spiritual home.

### Don't stop doing missions; do them smarter.

Good intentions are not enough. I pray that parachurch organizations,
with their clear love for Christ and passion for the gospel, will
reconsider how best to use their resources in spreading the gospel where
it is not known. Make no mistake, these ministries *can* make a
difference with unreached people group. However, to be most effective,
it will not be parachurch ministers on the ground. It will be with
spiritual, emotional, material and logistical support for
church-planting (whether denominational or not) missionaries on the
ground.

Many missionaries could use this kind of support badly. While
missionaries from denominations like the Southern Baptist Convention
have backing from large missions agencies like the International
Missions Board, many others are sent from individual churches; they
raise their own support and rely on what resources are freely or
inexpensively available to them. Many of them labor without the backup
that parachurch ministries may be perfectly poised to provide, if only
they recognized how vastly more effectively this approach would be in
advancing the gospel.

Believers need churches, so missions must always include planting
churches. Interdenominational parachurch ministries *cannot* plant
churches. But they can support the men and women *are* able to plant
churches. May God lead these ministries to refocus their efforts, and
may he bless their work richly!

  [elsewhere]: http://www.pillarontherock.com/2010/11/church-and-parachurch-introduction_16.html
    "Church and Parachurch @ Pillar on the Rock"
  [Family Life]: http://www.familylife.com/site/c.dnJHKLNnFoG/b.3204559/k.CA50/Events.htm?fromhp=TopNavEvents
