Title: Shepherding a Child's Heart
Date: 2012-06-05 13:11
Author: chriskrycho
Category: Book Reviews
Tags: Books, children, discipline, gospel, hermeneutics, parenting, sin, spanking, Tedd Tripp
Slug: shepherding-a-childs-heart

"??Shepherding a Child's Heart??(Buy @
Amazon)":http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0966378601/ref=as\_li\_ss\_tl?ie=UTF8&tag=ardent-fidelity-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=390957&creativeASIN=0966378601
is one of the single strangest books I've read in quite some time. The
good parts are fantastic, some of the best material I've ever
encountered on child-rearing. The rest of it left me scratching my head,
or wanting to bang it on a table. I rarely have so bipolar a reaction to
a book; but then, books are rarely so apt to be described as having
multiple personality disorder.<!--more-->

<figure class="vertical" style="text-align: center">
!http://www.chriskrycho.com/theology/files/2012/06/shepherding\_childs\_heart.jpg(Buy
@
Amazon)!:http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0966378601/ref=as\_li\_ss\_tl?ie=UTF8&tag=ardent-fidelity-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=390957&creativeASIN=0966378601

</figure>
h3. The good

The first chunk of Tedd Tripp's book is outstanding. He opens with the
proposition that parents' goals for their children are usually wrong,
and accordingly that most parenting is wrong. A bold statement, to be
sure, but he's correct. Most parents, even Christian parents, spend most
of their time focused on behavior, rather than the heart. This is to be
expected: parents, like everyone else, are selfish and changed behavior
at least makes a parent's life easier. Too: changing behavior is
\_much\_ easier than changing hearts, seeing as the latter is simply out
of our reach.

However normal it is to focus on fixing behavior, though, it is
ultimately counterproductive. Children simply learn hypocrisy. The aim,
instead, must be to point the child to his need for Christ, to highlight
her idols, to expose his inability to fight his sin, to show her that
Christ is \_better\_ than her sin. Easier said than done, of course, but
as a thesis goes, it's one I can get behind - it fits Scripture's
teaching.

We are all of us desperately broken and wicked and we all begin
miserably ignorant of our state. Thus, when Tripp argues that parents
need to find ways to help their children recognize their sin and their
need for Christ, and when he suggests that parents need to help their
children see Christ as gloriously better than anything else, I couldn't
agree more strongly. I was regularly reading aloud to Jaimie from this
section of the book. His applications to parents' hearts and to our
approach to discipline expressed things I've thought but been unable to
clearly express for quite some time.

And then he started diving into methodology, and everything just went to
pieces. There is some good content scattered throughout the latter two
thirds of the book, but it's mixed in with quite a mess.

h3. The bad

The weak points of the book break down into two broad categories:
Tripp's views on discipline, and his view of authority.

h4. A strange fixation

Tripp has a fixation on spanking. He finds a way to dismiss \_every\_
other form of discipline a parent might use with a child as unbiblical,
ungodly, un-gospel centered, and unhelpful. He then proceeds to
delineate very carefully how spanking must occur in very specific ways
to avoid falling into the traps of abuse, parental anger, and so forth.
These qualifications are good and right (and a necessary guard against
abuse). However, he seems to miss that the same sorts of constraints can
be applied to timeouts, grounding, and so forth. Equally, despite his
own many constraints on spanking, he misses his own point that spanking
is just as susceptible to misuse or misleading the child as the vast
majority of the other forms of discipline he denigrates.

Throughout the remainder of the book, Tripp emphasizes that spanking is
not only a valid form of discipline; it is \_the\_ valid form of
discipline. More, he says: God has \_commanded\_ parents to discipline
their children in the form of spanking, citing the several references to
the "rod" in Proverbs in the context of parental discipline (see, e.g.
Proverbs 13:24, 22:15, 23:13-14, 29:15). Because his exegesis is lacking
(more on this below), his application of these passages goes astray as
well. Even if these passages include a command to spank, they certainly
do not \_forbid\_ the other sorts of discipline Tripp dismisses.

Thankfully, Tripp argues that spanking should be coupled with clear
communication, and in fact his chapters on communication between parents
and children are some of those bright points scattered throughout the
latter parts of the book. I particularly appreciated his note that
communication must be two-way: not merely the parent addressing the
child, but the parent listening to and seeking to understand the child.
This is good, and I wish many parents paid more attention to their
children. Certainly this is something Jaimie and I will seek to do well
with Elayne!

h4. Authority issues

The second major issue in the book is Tripp's focus on "authority".
While parental authority is very real, Tripp makes it the single most
important aspect of parenting. Mentions of parental love are rare and
nearly always coupled with references to authority. Nor is this merely
limited to the parent-child relationship; Tripp makes constant reference
to the authority of employers over employees and husbands over wives.
More, he makes much of people's need to be under God's authority and
very little of God's love.

I agree with Tripp that American culture in late modernity has thrown
off all healthy views of authority. If a corrective is needed, it's
here, no doubt. But as is so often the case with evangelical responses
to failures, Tripp spirals off in another unhelpful direction. Whenever
we fixate on correcting a problem, instead of aiming more directly at
the Biblical picture, we run the risk of ending up in another quagmire.
So it is here.

Because Tripp's framing the parent-child (and in fact many other)
relationships primarily in terms of authority - and the fact that he
builds this on his view of God - is a recipe for massively unhealthy
relationships. To be sure, Tripp recognizes that authority can be
abused. He does not seem to recognize that his emphases and omissions
\_will\_ push people toward unhealthy relationships. Yes, authority is a
significant part of parent-child relationships, and of each of our
relationships with God. But it is not ultimate.

h3. The ugly

Why does Tripp go so wrong? It seems to me he has imported quite a few
cultural notions on top of the Scriptural text, to his own very great
detriment. Both of the problems I outlined above seem to me to spring
from hermeneutical failures on Tripp's part: he simply does not read the
texts he uses carefully.

h4. The shape of a relationship

As I noted above, Tripp is right to critique our culture's
antiauthoritarian bent. However, he imports in its place a
pro-authoritarian bent, and I find no more warrant for that in Scripture
than the hyper-egalitarianism so dominant in our day. It is true, as
Tripp says, that we are under God's authority and that we are called to
obedience. Likewise, children are called to obey their parents, and I
will even grant that this is the only command given to children
explicitly. Authority is important. It is not, however, ultimate.

We know this because the parent-child relationship is modeled on our
relationship with our heavenly Father - and while obedience is certainly
enjoined of us, God has done much more than simply \_command\_ us. He
has identified with us, poured out love to us, shown us his character
gently and graciously, and born with our disobedience long and
patiently. We are called into perfect submission to him, yes, but we are
called into a relationship that is much \_more\_ than mere submission.
So, too, the parent-child relationship includes submission, but it
includes much more as well - though Tripp mentions none of these other
components to the relationship.

In other words: what he says about authority is correct; it is simply,
woefully, incomplete.

h4. Proverbs, not...

Proverbs, as it turns out, is a book of \_proverbs\_. Not promises, and
not, generally speaking, commands. Proverbs are observations on life, on
how things generally work. The "commands" Tripp emphasizes so often are
nothing of the sort, and while we would be deeply remiss to skip over
them as a consequence, his application fails precisely because his
hermeneutic is so poor.

When Tripp reads these passages on discipline and interprets them as
commands, he misses the \_point\_ of the proverbs he cites. The author
is not giving an explicit command as to how parents should discipline
their children; he is simply saying that they \_must\_ discipline their
children. In fact, the only place in the Proverbs where physical
discipline is explicit (as opposed to merely implied by the use of the
word "rod") is Proverbs 23:13-14, which is an encouragement to parents
that discipline is good and that using a rod will not kill someone. It
is not, however, a command to refrain from any other forms of
discipline, Tripp's insistence notwithstanding.

h4. A "rod"

This question of "the rod" bears further examination. It is plain that
in every case but one in Proverbs, "the rod" is being used as a
synecdoche: a representative image that carries a broader set of
meanings than simply the word itself. This is actually quite common in
our day-to-day language: we might say, "Nice wheels," using the wheels
to represent the whole of someone's vehicle. That the various authors of
the proverbs are using the rod this way becomes apparent when we
consider the pattern of the proverbs involving the rod.

In every case, an exhortation to use the rod is immediately followed
with an exhortation to discipline the child. In several cases, the rod
is mentioned in one half of a couplet, while discipline is mentioned in
the other half. In several case, the two are joined in a single phrase:
"rod of discipline" (Proverbs 22:15) or "rod and reproof" (Proverbs
29:15). In several cases, discipline is mentioned without any mention of
the rod (Proverbs 19:18, 29:17).

When Tripp goes so far as to use Hebrews 12:11 to justify his arguments
about spanking, it has already become painfully obvious that his beliefs
are driving his interpretations, not the other way around as it should
be. The rod in Proverbs is primarily an image for the overall picture of
discipline, as is evidenced by the basic structure of each proverb and
the language used.

h4. Literally. But not \_too\_ literally

Tripp's other problem is that he wants to take these passages on the rod
literally - but not too literally! As it turns out, his hermeneutic
isn't even self-consistent. Tripp wants to insist that these passages in
Proverbs demand the use of spanking, because "rod" suggests corporal
punishment. But as he discusses \_how\_ to spank, it is clear that an
actual, physical rod is never in the picture. Children are to be spanked
with the hand.

Why, I wonder, is the passage to be taken only just as literally as
Tripp wants it to? Why is corporal punishment good and fine, but the use
of an actual rod out? The answer is that, in practice, Tripp rightly
recognizes that the so-called "commands" he cites have to do with
discipline - not with the specific means by which that discipline must
be implemented. If only he had taken this hermeneutic farther!

h4. My view of spanking

Lest anyone mistake me: I am not opposed to spanking, used judiciously
and wisely (indeed, used in much the ways Tripp suggests). To the
contrary, I think it is a valid and useful part of the parental
disciplinary repetoire. I differ with Tripp in that it is only a
\_part\_ of the disciplinary repetoire, not the entirety of it.

h3. Putting it all together

"??Shepherding a Child's Heart??(Buy @
Amazon)":http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0966378601/ref=as\_li\_ss\_tl?ie=UTF8&tag=ardent-fidelity-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=390957&creativeASIN=0966378601
is thus a very strange mix of very good and just plain bad. I can't
recommend it wholeheartedly by any means; neither can I dismiss it out
of hand. There is a lot of good in Tripp's parenting \_philosophy\_, and
some very good material in his applications of that philosophy,
especially as it relates to communication. But there is equally bad
material in some of his application, and unnecessarily so. Were Tripp to
be a bit more self-consistent, he would have a much better book.

Should you read it? Yes, actually - but you should read \_carefully\_.
Tripp is absolutely right about the aims of parenting, about the way
discipline should be used, and even about how spanking should be
implemented. He is wrong in his interpretations, and in his
extrabiblical limitations on the means available to parents in
disciplining their children. Don't let the brilliantly biblical parts of
the book blind you to the mistakes elsewhere - but don't let those
mistakes, however significant, prevent you from taking away the good,
either.

h4. Addendum: on book reviews

Some of you may be wondering why I took so long to critique Tripp the
way I did here, especially seeing as much of the book is very good. I
could write a lengthy post on that topic alone, but I will content
myself with a brief summary; and there are basically two reasons.

First, I have no doubt that many people, impressed with the thoroughly
biblical character of Tripp's philosophy of parenting, will simply take
him at his word when it comes to details of implementation - and the
more so because \_some\_ of those details are also quite good. I don't
want people doing that; I want them taking the good and straining out
the bad. In other words: my conclusion sums up my reason for doing book
reviews at all: I want to help people learn to think carefully about
books, so that we can value what is good and set aside what is not.

Second, I am passionate about the right handling of the word of God, and
I am nowhere more concerned about this than in my own camp. This book is
a mainstay of conservative parenting, \_especially\_ in the "new
Reformed" crowd in which I find myself. While we can spend time
critiquing those outside our camp, and this may be profitable to a
greater or lesser extent, I firmly believe that we should also exert a
great deal of effort to correct our own thinking - more, even, than we
spend on correcting outsiders.
