Title: Short, interpretively challenging, or both
Date: 2012-03-22 08:00
Author: chriskrycho
Category: Posts
Tags: 2 John, 2 Peter, 2 Timothy, community, eschatology, evangelicalism, hope, Philemon, suffering
Slug: short-interpretively-challenging-or-both

One of the more interesting aspects of my life right now is leading a
small community group for our church. Or, well, not *so* small - though
attendance varies week to week according to people's life circumstances,
we have close to 20 regulars. We've been working through what I
originally called "The Epistles Less Traveled," getting our heads and
hearts around portions of the New Testament most believers just don't
spend much time on. Our journey so far has taken us on an interesting
trip. <!--more-->

-   <cite class="bibleref" title="2 Timothy">2 Timothy</cite> (everyone
    reads the first letter Paul wrote to Timothy)
-   <cite class="bibleref" title="Philemon">Philemon</cite> (this one
    involves a slave, right?)
-   <cite class="bibleref" title="2 Peter">2 Peter</cite> (frankly, I
    should have included the first one!)
-   <cite class="bibleref" title="2John">2 John</cite> (this one
    involves some lady and her kids)

I'm always amazed by just how much an author can pack into a short
space. You want an interesting study? Go through all the epistles and
just pull apart the greetings and farewells the various authors offer.
The theological depth of these short sections is often breathtaking. (I
spent a substantial part of my time preparing for our discussion of 2
John on those first three verses.) Likewise, the prayers scattered
throughout make for interesting reading, as well as good models for us.
Or, to take a cue from one of tonight's discussion points in 2 John,
what brings the author joy?

One of the real joys of this journey is seeing how consistent the
authors of the New Testament really were: Peter and Paul and John were
strikingly different men with unmistakably different personalities and
equally disparate styles in their writing. Yet the same passions
motivated them - profound love of God, care for his people, and a
radical commitment to making Christ known and worshipped throughout the
world.

Even remarkably brief books like Philemon or 2 John can cover enormous
territory, and with more profundity than one would initially suggest. It
can be easy to overlook the treasures we have in these books because
they are short, interpretively challenging, or both (2 Peter, I'm
looking at you). Paul's deeply personal missive to Timothy, with its
reflections on suffering and its call to endurance, is a powerful
picture of the power of the gospel to empower real Christian living. Not
Christian living of the bookstore variety with its feel-good platitudes
and secrets to being a better husband/wife/child/banker/weather balloon
maker. Christian living that will endure abandonment, imprisonment, and
torture to make Christ known. Nor is this theme restricted to Paul;
Peter's letters bear the same stamp of faith branded into the skin with
suffering.

I wonder if we don't skip over some of these letters not only because of
their size or "obscurity" but also because they're less obviously peppy
than our favorites. Philippians has some suffering in view, but it's far
more blatantly encouraging than 2 Timothy. Joy in the Lord is an easier
theme to apprehend than Paul's piercing proclamation that "all who
desire to live a godly life in Christ Jesus will be persecuted" (2
Timothy 3:12). It's certainly more fun to read about.

Nor do we do particularly well with imprecations or descriptions of
judgments. Yet, as our small group has discussed, few things are more
hopeful or helpful in the face of suffering than the assurance that
things will not remain as they are forever. I suspect our brothers and
sisters facing persecution value 2 Peter's description of the judgment
awaiting persecutors and false teachers far more than we comfortable
westerners.

Too, these books all spend quite a bit of time on false teachers,
persecutors, and unbelievers. Given the prevalence of false teachers in
the American church, I *wish* we took all of the apostles' warnings
against deceivers more seriously. Even 2 John, all of 13 brief verses
long, dedicates nearly half its text to a caution against heretics. This
is not a popular or easy topic; we would all much rather hear another
lesson on better marriages than a call to resist false teachers.

Still less are we inclined to like messages on standing fast lest we
lose our reward or, worse, prove our faith was never true to begin. Try
getting through 2 Peter with a comfortably cozy view of salvation of
assurance intact. If you succeed, you're not paying attention. We have
assurance, but it's a good deal less cozy than comfortable Christians
might like. Apostasy and wolves in our midst, or another encouragement
to handle your finances in a God-honoring way - which would most of us
prefer?

And just for the record, I think following Christ does fill even weather
balloon construction with greater glory and purpose, and we *should*
handle our finances in a God-honoring way. Yet I believe God has called
us to more and deeper than this. He has called us to self-sacrificial
lives that put Christ and his glory at the center - lives that say
"Christ is my treasure," not "Christ is my means to other treasures."
The cost will be high. Again, Paul says it plain: everyone who desires
to follow Christ *will* suffer. But Peter reminds us that our suffering
will end, and that the God of justice will reign.

This last point is the one that has encouraged me - and, I think, our
community group - most. Evangelicals spend precious little time on
eschatology, and most of it focused on minutiae (the time and details of
the Tribulation and the Rapture being the main ones, especially in the
[dispensationalist][] strain of [premillennialism][]). The big picture,
though? We miss that, and to our great detriment. We forget that the
point of *all* the eschatological passages in Scripture is Christ's
final reign over death and evil.

We are waiting, eagerly and hopefully, for new heavens and a new earth
in which righteousness dwells (2 Peter 3:13). And we wait with
confidence because God has *promised* and he never lies; he *always*
fulfills his word.

  [dispensationalist]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dispensationalism
    "Read about it @ Wikipedia"
  [premillennialism]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Premillennialism
    "Read about it @ Wikipedia"
