Title: The World is Flat
Date: 2012-01-30 12:32
Author: chriskrycho
Category: Book Reviews
Tags: economics, vocation, witness
Slug: the-world-is-flat

If your computer crashes today, and you pick up your phone to call tech
support, the chances are good you'll hear an Indian voice on the other
end. The computer was likely designed by a team of engineers in America,
perhaps with collaboration in Europe, Japan, or Korea. The majority of
its parts were probably manufactured in factories in China, Taiwan. It
may have been assembled anywhere from Brazil to Biloxi.

*The world is flat.* <!--more-->

In spring and early summer 2011, tens of thousands across northern
Africa rose in protests. Starting in Tunisia and Egypt, a ripple of
largely peaceful movements spread across a sizeable portion of the
Muslim world. Two factors were particularly remarkable, to my way of
thinking, in this surge of political self-will.

First, the protests coalesced in response to particular acts of
indecency by the governments - but such acts had happened many times
before. These acts triggered a response because they were inevitably far
more public than they had been in the past. Inevitably, I say, because
this is the age of ubiquitous cell phones with video cameras, and also
the age of Youtube, where every video can capture a global audience.

Second, these movements propagated through new media. Not only were they
were instigated by socially propagating video, they were coordinated
largely through social media - Twitter and Facebook especially.
Moreover, they were almost entirely decentralized. While the movements
had spokesmen and instigators, they gained their power through the rapid
spread of ideas and plans through the social networks, not through
ordinary organization and hierarchy.

*The world is flat.*

The book
--------

Thomas Friedman has been making this point for the better part of a
decade now. In [<cite>The World is Flat</cite>][], he lays out not only
what has happened, as in the examples above, but also *how*. Over the
last few decades, there have been a number of enormous advances in
technology that have converged to allow people all over the world to
interact and collaborate in ways unimaginable in all the previous
millennia of human history. This technological progress has combined
with the opening of a number of previously closed economies to allow
vast new markets to open - markets not only for sales, but for workers.

Friedman spends most of his time on the impact this globalization has on
businesses and how Americans should respond in the business and
education sectors, though he takes time in his conclusion to address the
broader ethical implications of these changes.

Though Friedman's comments on education and ethics are interesting, I
think his views on business, entrepreneurship, and charity are the
points to which today's Christians should be paying the most attention.
First, he notes that "big can act small," that is, large companies can
move extremely quickly by taking advantage of the new world. This is how
Amazon can deliver a book to your door the day after you order it (as
happened to me last week), or large chains can make prices low and keep
inventories well coordinated.

On the flip side, he notes that "small can act big:" individuals can now
be as effective as large corporations in many businesses by taking
advantage of the large business tools that are available to everyone.
Later in the book he applies this latter principle to the concept of
charity work, as well, noting that some of the best charitable projects
of recent years have come about by individuals recognizing needs and
moving on them, taking advantage of the many tools afforded them my
modern technology.

Both of these are equally true of Christians who want to reach the world
with the good news of Jesus.

### More effective world Christians

Christians should be slow to model the practices of the church on
business, but we should not ignore the lessons businesses have learned
these past twenty years. We are not profit-makers, and efficiency is not
our highest goal, but careful consideration may point out areas we can
be more effective stewards of the financial resources God has entrusted
to us.. Christian organizations can learn from the ways that large
businesses have successfully put these new technologies to use. For
example, many tasks can be automated or streamlined that formerly
required hand work. Organizations may also find that they can bring
operations in house that were formerly taken care of by outside
contractors.

And yes, Christians can and should think about "outsourcing." Christians
here can benefit Christians in struggling economies abroad by sourcing
jobs there - without the sort of fear-mongering that has too often
dominated the discussion in America. The more we can partner with the
rest of the global church, the healthier both the global church and the
American church will be. Dependency and an imperialistic mindset both
betray the equality to which God has called us. Instead, those of us who
are rich - which is to say, nearly all Americans - should share
liberally with those who are not. That includes sharing our jobs, when
and where we can.

As a quick aside, Friedman's discussion of the way people have used
small business to help kickstart real economic growth in third-world
countries should be required reading. I wish that more Christians would
think about how to use their vocation for the benefit of others. As a
teacher of mine put it: poor people's greatest need is not actually
food, money, clothing, or any other good, but rather *a job*. Christian
business people now have countless opportunities in this flat new world
to do business in a way that *really* helps the poor.

> But globalization is not simply about the spread of capitalism or
> markets or enhanced trade. It is not simply an economic phenomenon and
> its impact is not exclusively economic. It is a much broader, deeper,
> and more complex phenomenon, involving new forms of communication and
> innovation. The flattening of the world is about the creation of a
> global platform for multiple forms of sharing work, knowledge, and
> entertainment.  
>  (<cite>p. 482</cite>)

The other side of this is the reality that small churches and even
individuals can accomplish far more than they could have just a few
decades ago. To take just one example, consider small group discussion
materials. While there are certainly still many courses and curricula
being created by professional publishers, there are also a broad array
of alternatives being created by small teams or individual teachers at
local churches. Because the internet is an extremely low cost
distribution platform, these alternatives can often be distributed for
free. At my own church, one of our pastors has created Bible study plans
for a number of topics and books of the Bible, plans made freely
available on the church's website. Anyone in all the world can take
advantage of them.

Or, for another example, take the enterprising idea some missions
workers have had in the past few years: passing information to local
believers - books, Bibles, sermons, any kind of content imaginable - on
small flash devices. These sorts of efforts do not require massive
institutional overhead. They simply require someone to think about the
ways technology can serve the needs of the church, especially the
oppressed church, and then to do it. The costs and barriers to entry are
low enough that you or I can make a real difference on the other side of
the world in remarkable ways.

We are called to be world Christians, with a view bigger than our own
little corner of the globe. Our first allegiance is not to American
supremacy, but to the kingdom of God. Accordingly, we should consider
how our actions may be hurting or benefiting other believers on the
other side of the world. Further, we should actively look for ways to
take advantage of the new opportunities before us to extend our reach as
individual churches and believers, and to do our work more effectively
and responsibly as larger organizations.

### Great power, great responsibility

There is a second major application of Friedman's thesis: the flattening
of the world means anyone, anywhere, can publish their thoughts and find
an audience. The democratization of media means that many more
Christians can offer their perspectives the broader church of Christ -
for good or for ill. It is to this reality that we now turn.

> The fact is that the world has gotten flat and more interconnected
> much faster than people have developed the norms and ethics to have
> their words go everywhere unedited and uncensored, and much faster
> than people have adapted to hearing everything whispered about them.
> Democracy is great, but democracy without responsibility is truly
> frightening.  
>  (<cite>p. 527</cite>)

Anyone who has spent much time in the Christian part of the blogosphere
knows that it is a fairly equal mix of thoughtful commentary,
bloviation, and imbecilic assaults on character. (To be fair, I think
most Christian bloggers are *aiming* for thoughtful commentary; the
problem is that so few actually achieve that goal.) Whatever the topic,
many of the voices chiming in are either ignorant, graceless, or both.

As Friedman notes, people have simply not had time to develop the sense
of responsibility to accompany their new power. Christians of every
stripe, at every age, with every level of theological education, now
have the ability to voice their views on any and every topic. In some
ways, this is fantastic. Many Christian bloggers are godly believers who
have wise perspectives to offer - single moms juggling families and
jobs, young people brimming over with passion, 65-year-old Sunday school
teachers. I praise God that these people can now share their God-given
gifts with the rest of us.

Unfortunately, however, this democratization of publication means that
the intemperate young believers, the cage-phase Calvinists, the gossips,
and the backbiters have just as broad a platform as anyone. I have seen
Christians create smear campaigns, accuse people of rank heresy, and
pass on rumors as true. I have seen people make sweeping theological
pronouncements so far removed from Scripture as to be unrecognizable,
and be hailed as great fonts of wisdom. I have seen Christian witness
tarred and tarnished by uncountable blog posts and comment threads that
degenerate into unrestrained incivility.

> At its best, cyberspace adds to the richness of the public debate and
> brings forward new and valuable voices who might never have been heard
> from before. But at its worst, it brings forward more extreme and
> irresponsible voices with fewer restraints and enables them to throw
> more spitballs farther and bigger than ever before.  
>  (<cite>p. 530</cite>)

Just because everyone *can* publish their thoughts to the wide world, in
other words, does not mean they *should*. With great power comes
responsibility, and all that. Many Christians are spreading their
opinions far and wide who simply should not be - or at the least, they
need good editors, preferably editors with a pastoral bent.

I subscribe to dozens of blogs by pastors, moms, scholars, and engineers
who have greatly enriched my faith - people I would never have known
without the Internet. I praise God that you and I can share our love for
Christ and yet potentially never meet face to face until heaven. But it
grieves me deeply that many Christians write with assumed authority they
have not earned on subjects they have not studied in ways that dishonor
Christ. We must do better. We must be more careful in our interaction
with one another. We must grow in humility, patience, kindness and
grace. We must learn to simply be silent sometimes.

### The pace of change

One final point worth considering carefully is just how fast the world
is changing today. Though this third edition was published in 2007, only
five years ago, some of its contents are already remarkably dated. For
the simplest examples, take the pervasive references to then-dominant
Myspace, or Friedman's frequent use of the word "cyberspace" - a word
that has all but fallen out of our lexicon in the intervening years.
Facebook now rules the roost and Myspace is all but dead. Likewise, the
internet is no longer a mentally distinct space for most of us; it is
simply an integral and *ordinary* part of our lives.

Christians cannot afford to pretend that the world is not changing. We
should be hesitant to stake out any position too firmly if the position
depends on certain technological realities that are prone to change.
Neither can we afford to be slaves to the new; that there is some
innovation available to us does not necessarily mean it is helpful. The
challenge, then, is to evaluate each innovation as it comes down the
line and carefully examine its costs and its benefits. More than that,
we must *continue* to evaluate costs and benefits over time; none of us
can see all the uses to which a given technology will be put when we
first encounter it. (Others have written on this topic at great length;
for a contemporary, consistently thoughtful and Christ-centered
introduction to this field, see John Dyer's [blog][] or his recent book
[From the Garden to the City][].)

Theological truths are constant, but culture and technology are very
much in flex. The twin temptations are to let our theology change with
culture, or to hold our cultural and technological views with the
firmness that we should accord only theology. We should hold our
doctrines firmly, and respond to changing culture and technology in
light of truth - not the other way around.

Conclusion
----------

Friedman's book is an excellent resource, and believers interested in
being true "world Christians" need to consider its lessons carefully. We
have a responsibility to take the gospel to all the world, and we have
more effective tools to accomplish that end than ever before. That will
require us to learn to use the tools well, and also to recognize their
limitations - and ours. In our blogging here at home, our efforts to use
business to benefit the poor abroad, and in the work of global missions,
the changes wrought by globalization cannot be ignored. Accordingly,
this book should be required reading for pastors, entrepreneurs, and
blogger moms. In particular, the first section of the book, which
explains what has happened and how, and then chapters 12–14 would be
profitable for nearly every Christian.

<cite>[The World is Flat 3.0: A Brief History of the Twenty-first
Century][<cite>The World is Flat</cite>]</cite>  
©2007 Thomas L. Friedman  
Picador, 175 Fifth Avenue, New York, NY 10010

  [<cite>The World is Flat</cite>]: http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0312425074/ref=as_li_ss_tl?ie=UTF8&tag=thafl-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=390957&creativeASIN=0312425074
    "Buy @Amazon"
  [blog]: http://donteatthefruit.com
    "Don't Eat the Fruit | Technology is Fast, Redemption is Slow"
  [From the Garden to the City]: http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0825426685/ref=as_li_ss_tl?ie=UTF8&tag=thafl-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=390957&creativeASIN=0825426685
    "Buy @Amazon"
