Title: What do you feel about...?
Date: 2012-01-20 08:00
Author: chriskrycho
Category: Posts
Tags: belief, feeling, maturity, semantics, truth
Slug: whatdo-you-feel-about

Sometimes, the questions we ask indicate as much about us as our
response to the answers we receive. For example, I was discussing a
controversial theological point with someone recently, and at one point
in the conversation, she quite innocuously asked a question starting,
“But do you feel that…”

The phrasing caught my attention. It is common enough, at least in the
circles I run in. People often speak of what they *feel* to be true in a
given area. In one sense, the phrase is harmless enough: people really
mean, “This is what I believe.” In another sense, though, it should give
us pause<!--more--> that Christians often treat “I feel this” and “I
believe this” as interchangeable.

### Semantics matter

Often, the words we use and the ways we use them expose something
important about us. Linguists and philosophers have recognized for quite
some time that our vocabularies shape our view of the world around us
and *vice versa*. There are all sorts of consequences arising from this
simple fact – complicated challenges for translators, questions about
philosophy of mind, and so on. For the moment, however, I want to focus
on just one.

If we use two terms interchangeably in our ordinary, day-to-day
conversation, we are quietly indicating that we basically equate those
terms. This isn’t a conscious phenomenon; it’s simply one of the ways
that our language reflects our underlying (even pre-verbal) assumptions
about the world we live in. Accordingly, observing how we treat various
words – as equivalent, contrastive, complementary, etc. – can help us
understand the way we think about our lives, including our faith.

Given this, I find it suggestive and a bit worrisome that Christians
often use “believe” and “feel” interchangeably in our theological
discussions.

### The good Christian struggle

Now, most evangelical Christians I know would, if asked, deny that their
feelings about a topic have the same value as a carefully considered
belief grounded in Scripture – as it should be! Unfortunately, the way
those same Christians speak suggests that many of them actually treat
belief and feeling as basically equivalent. This equivalence runs deep;
it is apparently one of our most basic views of the world around us.

That makes it much harder to deal with. While surface level beliefs are
fairly easily confronted and changed, these sort of deep-seated
assumptions about reality are much more difficult to untangle. At issue
is the conflict between how we *really* approach the world around us and
how we *want* to. Every Christian deals with this internal war. He wants
to be pure, but constantly finds himself tempted to lust. She wants to
be charitable, but constantly struggles not to gossip. We want to ground
our approach to God in thoughtful study of Scripture, but often find
ourselves relying on our feelings instead.

Each of us has spent much or all of our lives immersed in a culture that
prioritizes feeling, especially in spiritual matters, so this struggle
should come as no surprise. Not only does our culture grant us spiritual
autonomy to decide for ourselves what is right and true; it also tells
us that spiritual understanding is essentially emotional. Simply by of
living in this culture, most of us have absorbed these toxic views to
some extent or another – and make no mistake: they are toxic. Emotions
are deeply fallible and often quick to change. God’s revelation of
himself in Scripture, thankfully, is neither .

Accordingly, mature Christians grow to understand the world in the terms
set by Scripture, not those set by fallen and finite human emotion. When
we encounter a point in the Bible that butts up against what we feel,
*we* must bend. We must reject the tendency to worship our own feelings
by giving them greater credence than God’s word. Christians are to be
concerned first of all with truth.

### An aside on emotions

Of course, someone may protest that the Christian life is experiential,
and this is a valid point. Our faith is not merely a matter of assenting
to a set of propositions; we are called to *walk with God*. I agree,
then, that emotion is a necessary component of one’s pursuit of God.
However, our emotions are to follow what we know to be true, rather than
the other way around. We must discipline our emotional responses, just
as we do our intellectual responses, to submit to truth.

This may be a bit of a strange concept. We are not used to thinking
about *changing* our emotions; we are used to thinking of them as things
that simply *are*, outside of our control. To some extent, this is true:
at any given moment, what we feel is not consciously chosen. However,
over time, as we saturate our minds with truth and as we pray, the
Spirit changes us. Just as your first thought in response to a statement
you once disagreed with might now be affirmation instead, your emotional
response might change from anger to delight at the same truth.

Nor must we be merely passive observers of this whole process. We can
choose to change our emotional state. When I am angry, I can choose to
stop being angry, although it may be difficult. When I am sad, I can
choose to smile and think in ways that make me happier. There are limits
to this ability, of course, and this process follows rather than
preempts those initial reactions. By the grace of God, though, as we
continue to choose to respond both intellectually and emotionally in an
appropriate way, those initial responses also begin to change.

### Addressing the problem

It should be clear that it is not enough for the Christian to treat
carefully considered belief and feeling as equivalent. Moreover, I think
it is clear that too many of us do, seeing as we so readily equate the
min our language. How do we unseat these deep-rooted wrong approaches to
the world around us?

1.  Pay attention. If we aren’t attentive to the ways we think and
    speak, we will never even notice these patterns, and accordingly
    will never deal with them. By contrast, when we are aware of the
    unbiblical ways we think and act, we can begin to attack them.
2.  Be people of prayer. Human hearts are stubborn things, resistant to
    all our efforts to change them. Without the Holy Spirit, all our
    efforts are doomed to failure. We cannot (and should not try to)
    escape from our culture, but we can and must fight its degenerative
    effects on our souls, and the only way to swim against such a strong
    current is prayerful reliance on the Holy Spirit.
3.  Be people of the Word. First, the Holy Spirit does much of his work
    in our hearts by shaping us through His revelation. Second, to
    unseat lies from their throne in our hearts, we must put truth in
    their place, and we know truth through Scripture.
4.  Be people in community. It is often easier to catch the little
    details in the ways others think and speak than in ourselves – and
    the flip side is that it is often easier for others to catch the
    hiccups in our thinking as well. As always, we need each other for
    sanctification.

