Title: Atrophied muscles
Date: 2012-01-17 11:45
Author: chriskrycho
Category: Reflections
Tags: discipline, practice, time, writing
Slug: atrophied-muscles

I love writing. I've known this for a long time, but it has become
increasingly clear over the last few years. Taking a year off has only
made that more clear. A year ago, I decided to attempt to write a novel,
and so to trade one sort of writing for another. For better or for
worse, the novel didn't happen. I managed to write about 10,000 words,
but<!--more--> then I ended up spending that time learning web design
for the rest of the year. Ultimately, I think that use of time will
prove to have been wise, as I am now planning to do web design and
development as a *job* in the near future. The result, in any case, was
a year in which I did very little writing.

I missed it. More even than I realized, until I began writing again. As
I quickly pounded out a post for [Ardent Fidelity][] last night, I
experienced a particular happiness I had not felt in quite some time.

Writing, as I explained to Jaimie a few days ago, is not only relaxing
and fun but also incredibly productive. I *think* as I write, and so I
come to understand the topic on which I am writing better in the act of
creation. (I have, on occasion, had to rewrite initial sections of blog
posts entirely when I ended up coming to a different conclusion than I
expected when I began writing.)

Unfortunately, I have gotten rusty. After finishing those 10,000 words
of a stab at a novel, I produced less than 5,000 words of published
content the rest of 2011. It shows. My writing is a bit choppy, a bit
less polished than I would prefer. I need to edit more, tighten things
up around the edges more. My idiosyncrasies are back, though perhaps a
bit more restrained than they once were. My "voice" is blurrier.

Thankfully, as with all creative arts, practice makes better. (Not
perfect, but better.) Accordingly, I will get better if I can write just
a few times a week, in the various genres this new site layout so
readily affords - musings on art here, conversational discussions of
family life over at [On the Hearth][], technical discussions at
[Designgineering][], and theological thought (some of it *very*
carefully organized and structured) at [Ardent Fidelity][]. I am hoping
that the breadth of content will push me in ways that my old blogs have
not.

The downside to all of this is that it takes time. So it is with any
hobby; the question is whether the rewards of the hobby - intrinsic,
extrinsic, or a combination of the two - outweigh the cost in time. The
year I took off from writing made clear to me that the intrinsic rewards
of writing far outweigh the price in hours it demands. I am increasingly
aware of the same truth in my approaches to photography and music
composition - arts I enjoy deeply but to which I have not devoted
sufficient time as to produce much content, much less *masterful*
content. Worse, the more time I stay away, the less skillful I find
myself.

As in running, those atrophied "muscles" are painfully frustrating at
the beginning; they present a powerful incentive to continue working
faithfully even when the process is difficult, or when time is cramped.
The results of daily discipline are rarely visible in the short run, but
the cost of a lack of discipline is *always* visible in the long run. So
in 2012, I hope to exercise my creative muscles along with my physical
muscles - come what may!

  [Ardent Fidelity]: http://www.chriskrycho.com/theology/
  [On the Hearth]: http://www.chriskrycho.com/family/
  [Designgineering]: http://www.chriskrycho.com/web/
