Title: Evangelistic tracts, and real art
Date: 2012-07-16 22:49
Author: chriskrycho
Category: Reflections
Tags: art, Beautiful Things, Christian art, creativity, evangelicalism, Ghosts Upon The Earth, Güngör, music
Slug: evangelistic-tracts-and-real-art

You know music has power when it has you shivering while running in
hundred-degree heat.

Güngör’s [<cite>Ghosts Upon the Earth</cite>][] is like that, though.
From the opening track, the album screams its willingness to be and do
something terribly different from most Christian music of the last
quarter century. For one thing, this is an album, not just a collection
of songs. For another, the musical skill on display here combines with a
willingness to forge a new sound, rather than retread the same old
pop-rock milieu one more time.

Musical and lyrical unity in an album is a rarity today in any genre,
but this album tells a story. Indeed, it tells *the* story.

But back to those shivers. <!--more-->“Let There Be” is the first and
only time to date that any piece of art in any medium has struck me with
the same force and intensity as Tolkien’s glorious description of
creation in <cite>The Silmarillion</cite>. One suspects, given some of
the commonalities between the two, that Güngör is familiar with
“*Ainulindalë*”, Tolkien’s magnificent chapter of sung creation and sung
rebellion and sung divine triumph.

<figure class="vertical" style="text-align: center">
[![album cover for Ghosts Upon The Earth][]][<cite>Ghosts Upon the
Earth</cite>]

</figure>
<cite>Ghosts Upon the Earth</cite> sweeps from this divine moment of
joyous creation through an idyllic, Edenic revel in the delight of yet
unbroken fellowship with God before plunging through the Fall and into
the longing that pierces every heart in this age. But the hope of
resurrection comes soon in the proclamation that “when death dies / all
things live”, and this theme of hope then undergirds the painful journey
that follows. Every joy that follows in this album is tinged with
sorrow, but every moment of despair gives way eventually to hope. Again:
this is a journey. It is beautiful and broken.

Güngör’s first album, [<cite>Beautiful Things</cite>][], had musical
interest in spades but sometimes at the cost of musical intelligibility.
Much of the album – the titular track the main exception – required
repeated listens before I could “get” it, and the recording never
entered my regular listening. It was, like many classical pieces I have
studied, interesting but not consistently engaging. Here, the band has
achieved something remarkable: they have kept the same musical interest
and complexity, but in such a way that every song on the album is
engaging. You can sing this stuff with them, but you can also dig deep,
deep down into the musical guts and find there remains yet more to
plumb. That’s hard to pull off.

If you take a look at Güngör’s [blog][], you’ll note that Michael Güngör
has criticized the typical evangelical approach to art, and rightly so.
This album isn’t just a piece of music; it’s a salvo in a war against a
reductionist understanding of art that typifies so much of
evangelicalism. If it has become something of a cliche to attack the
evangelical approach to art, there nonetheless remains a need for pieces
to fill the gap, and there remains too the need to educate.

One reviewer on iTunes noted that the album confused him. It is not, he
noted, a typical worship album, and the lyrics were not all perfectly
suitable for use in evangelism. You could not, he suggested, just hand
this to an unbeliever and expect them to come away understanding the
gospel perfectly. The reviewer seemed particularly confused by the
second track, “Brother Moon,” with its references to “Brother Moon” and
“Sister Sun” and “Mother Earth.” I was bemused by his concern. Every
reference to nature points right back to the Creator behind it all.
More, the song is an innocent, Edenic revelry in the delight in unbroken
fellowship with God and in all his hands have made. In the end, the
album is as gospel-saturated as one could wish. But this was too much
lyrical and intellectual complexity for someone looking for an
evangelistic tract in the form of an album.

A high profile Christian music website posted a discussion of another
song (“This Is Not the End”), along with a walkthrough of the music a
few months ago. The comment thread – to my sorrow, but unfortunately not
my surprise – read much like that iTunes review. “Why isn’t Jesus
mentioned explicitly in this song?” wondered nearly half the comments.
“How can this be a 'worship’ song?” The closing lines of the song, “We
will shine like the stars / Bright, brighter” came in for particular
criticism. Complaints ranged from that lack of explicit reference to God
to comparisons to New Age philosophies.

This revealed a certain lack of Biblical literacy, of course – Esther
conspicuously fails to name God; the closing lines of the song are a
direct allusion to Daniel – but they also revealed an inability to grasp
the song in its context, or to understand how art can carry meaning
without functioning didactically.

That, of course, is as it should be. God called the world good in the
act of creating it: before the fall, before the need for the evangel
ever arose, the world was good. Creating beauty is good. The world has
instrinsic value, not merely as a means to an end, for it was made to
show forth the splendor of God, and so it does. Artistic endeavors
themselves have merit^[1][]^ even (or especially) when they avoid
preaching and stick to painting.

It may be cliché to say that evangelicals are bad at art – we are, and I
think most thoughtful folks know it – but we struggle to identify *why*
we are bad at art. Some point to the liturgical traditions from which
great Christian artists have sprung. There is likely some merit to this
point: liturgical traditions consciously embrace the role of beauty and
narrative in the service in ways that evangelical services generally
eschew for simpler and more viscerally emotional responses.

More fundamental, I suspect, is our tendency as evangelicals to see the
world in terms only of mission^[2][]^. Along the way, we lose sight of
many important truths: the beauty of vocation dimmed by overemphasis on
vocational ministry, the delight of community buried under the weight of
too many programs, and the value of art hidden in its subsumption under
propagandistic didacticism. We struggle in each of these areas because
we do not recognize that all things work to the glory of God.

My aim is not to diminish evangelism. (Quite the contrary, as will
become clear in a moment.)

When we fail to see the other goods in the world, when we attempt to
turn everything to the single aim of evangelization, we break those
other goods. We cease worshipping God in our vocation, considering it
inferior to the work of the paid pastor or missionary. We cease
worshipping God in our ordinary fellowship, considering community to be
pointless unless it’s doing something. (We’re often not sure what we
should be doing, but definitely more than just enjoying food and prayer,
right?) We cease worshipping God in the making of and enjoyment of good
art, considering it worthless unless it can be turned toward explicitly
evangelistic or didactic ends.

In so doing, we not only diminish those other goods; we hurt our
evangelistic cause. We paint a shallow picture of a God smaller than He
is: a God who has no time for ordinary men and women, for simple joys,
for the beauty of the world He made. And the remedy cannot be trying to
do each of those better for the sake of getting people to recognize him;
that’s just more of the same. Rather, we need a recovery of the value of
each sphere. Family, government, vocation, art, community, sport, and
yes, evangelism: these are distinct goods. Christ is at the center of
all of them, but they point to him differently. Art is not for
propaganda; it is for beauty and for meaning.

That Güngör’s music is not an evangelistic tract, not readily turned
into yet one more worship anthem, is in fact one measure of its real
artistic quality. That alone does not qualify it to be good art, but it
is a prerequisite. Until we grasp that, we will be left making gospel
tracts into movies and songs and novels, and wondering why our art is so
terrible.

Now: evangelicals have one other terrible tendency. We criticize far
more than we do the hard work of solving problems. The solution to this
problem is simple and hard: go make some good art. The kind that is
nuanced, interesting, saturated with biblical truth and with its eyes
wide open to all the beauty and all the horror of the world as it is;
that doesn’t feel the need to teach a lesson or explicate a message;
that simply revels in and shakes at the world God has made for us.

Oh – and when you find someone getting this right, make sure they can
keep doing it. For example: go buy [<cite>Ghosts Upon The
Earth</cite>][<cite>Ghosts Upon the Earth</cite>].

* * * * *

<section class="footnotes">
1.  The degree of merit an artistic piece has is of course up for
    discussion. Art is not neutral, and it is not wholly subjective. Art
    has value to the extent that a piece of art rightly reflects the
    world as it is – including the one behind it all – and challenges us
    to engage the world more truly. So evangelistic tracts and jingoism
    are of much lower value than secular works that provoke us to
    delight in what God has made, even unintentionally. But this also
    allows us to reject the purely deconstructive as ultimately
    destructive and therefore un-artistic. Much more could be said about
    this. [↑][]
    </p>
2.  Some might quibble with me that evangelicals are often very
    distracted from mission. This is true in the narrow sense; but we
    are usually distracted from the mission by some other mission. The
    gospel is not usually replaced, among evangelicals, with anything
    but some other gospel: a social gospel, a social justice gospel,
    even an art gospel. We are people who consciously aim everything at
    mission, even if sometimes the wrong mission. [↑][3]
    </p>

</section>

* * * * *

*This piece was cross-posted to [<cite>Mere Orthodoxy</cite>][], a blog
for people who love (writers who love) real writing and real
paragraphs.*

  [<cite>Ghosts Upon the Earth</cite>]: http://www.amazon.com/Ghosts-Upon-Earth-Gungor/dp/B005DZMQA4/?tag=ars-artis-20
    "buy at amazon"
  [album cover for Ghosts Upon The Earth]: http://www.chriskrycho.com/art/files/2012/07/ghosts_upon_the_earth.jpg
    "Ghosts Upon The Earth"
  [<cite>Beautiful Things</cite>]: http://www.amazon.com/Beautiful-Things-Gungor/dp/B0031AV74O/?tag=ars-artis-20
    "buy at amazon"
  [blog]: http://gungormusic.com/#!/category/blog/
  [1]: #fn51afdbb3-f241-4e68-aa07-479f0c019f36
  [2]: #fn5565d4bd-bf0f-49c7-ac11-924c8e782875
  [↑]: #fn1-ret
  [3]: #fn2-ret
  [<cite>Mere Orthodoxy</cite>]: http://www.mereorthodoxy.com/
