Title: The Triumph of Howard Shore
Date: 2012-02-14 12:23
Author: chriskrycho
Category: Reflections
Tags: Christian art, Howard Shore, J. R. R. Tolkien, music, myth, The Lord of the Rings
Slug: the-triumph-of-howard-shore

*In which, inspired by Shore's work on the film scores, I ponder
Tolkien's masterpiece. At length. (While glossing over some of the
linguistic inspiration for Tolkien's myth.)*

The triumph of Howard Shore's score for <cite>The Lord of the
Rings</cite> films is that it makes me want to reread the books. Again.
<!--more-->

Those of you who know me and my history with <cite>The Lord of the
Rings</cite> will know, first, that I am easily moved to reread the
great myth of our age, and second, that the movies for all their
excellence really missed the mark in a number of ways. The music,
however, was not one of those ways, and I would go so far as to say the
music was as near perfect as I can imagine.

Unlike the movies - which betray the fundamental blindness of their
makers, especially about character and nobility - the music captures the
best of Tolkien's world. Whether it is the pastoral and light-hearted
tone of the music for the Shire, the screeching aleatoric passages for
Shelob, the soaring and thrilling strains of a hardinger for Rohan, or
the pounding mechanical violence of the themes of darkness, Shore
capture the *world* that Tolkien so masterfully laid out.

I am an unabashed fan of Tolkien; I have found nothing that compares
with the scope of his imagination or the mythological riches of his
legendarium. Other authors have written at greater length or with
greater psychological depth. None, however, has managed to create a
*myth*. To be fair, most of them are not trying; the modern epic fantasy
is generally less interested in mythology than Tolkien, C. S. Lewis, or
the other Inklings, all of whom were profoundly versed in the great
authors of the past.

Tolkien was particularly unusual, however, in that the great authors he
studied in his academic career - and indeed, his great loves - were
drawn from an even broader stream than most of his contemporaries.
Though all of them loved the great English writers, and all of them were
well versed in the Greek and Roman epics as well, Tolkien loved the old
Norse legends, too. And while both he and Lewis shared a love of
mythology, it was only Tolkien who set out to do the impossible and fill
(what he perceived to be) a profound hole in English culture: the lack
of a coherent mythology. Drawing on those Norse legends he loved so
deeply, he built not only the stories that are so well known and loved
in <cite>The Hobbit</cite> and <cite>The Lord of the Rings</cite>, but
also a vast tapestry of mythological history behind them, covering
ground from Creation through the fall of Atlantis (Númenor, called
Atalantë, "The Fallen").

Tolkien and Lewis' best known fictional worlds both have creation
stories, and the stories have a great deal in common - right down to the
centrality of music in the creative act. Despite these commonalities,
the narratives have an enormously different feel to them - a difference
that highlights the different aims and approaches of the two authors.
Lewis' story is just that: *story*. It is seen through the eyes of a
wonder-struck boy, caught up in events whose import lies far beyond his
grasp but whose present outworkings are still comprehensible to his
human mind. Tolkien's creation narrative, by contrast, is higher in form
and richer in setting; it is the unobserved creation of all that is by
God and the angels. Even its form, that of a great symphony, is only an
explanation delivered by angels to Elves in a way that their lesser
minds could grasp, as though the reality itself were so far beyond
beings of flesh and blood as to defy true comprehension.

Lewis' aim was to illustrate theological concepts through story for
children - a good and noble aim, and part of the reason his books are so
approachable. Diggory's vision of Aslan's creative song is eminently
relatable: we can put ourselves in his shoes and imagine what it would
be to experience what he hears and sees. Tolkien's aim, by contrast, was
mythology, and not particularly mythology for children (<cite>The
Hobbit</cite> being an exception which worked its way into Middle-earth
and not the other way around). Mythology has always been concerned not
with what humans can hear and see but with what they *cannot*. It has
always been grasping for invisible divinity with feeble human words
unsuited for the task, but hurled upward nonetheless with the desperate
need of men to grasp at realities far larger and grander than their
limited vocabularies can circumscribe.

And so it is with the rest of Tolkien's mythos. He reaches into the
depths and presents stories and characters that are larger than life,
heroic figures we would imitate if we could. Tolkien was great because
he created true mythology. Tolkien *remains* great because he did not
leave his world unapproachable in its vastness or its depths of history.
<cite>The Lord of the Rings</cite> is mythic in its scope, its setting,
its conflict, and many of its primary figures. But like Lewis, Tolkien
gives us a view into the world of mythology with characters much smaller
than the drama against which they are set. The small physical size of
the hobbits echoes their smallness in the grand scheme of the story.
They are not angelic wizards, undying elves, or kings-in-exile. They are
simple beings doing their best with the days they are given. They become
heroes, but never *heroic*. They remain, at their most excellent, merely
excellent - not larger-than-life like Aragorn or Gandalf, not *epic*
figures at all.

The lack of such a viewpoint is what makes <cite>The Silmarillion</cite>
so much harder going: it is pure mythology, unadulterated by the
approachable point-of-view - a form our culture left behind long since,
having replaced it with the character-oriented novel and play. Yet
Tolkien perceived (rightly, it seems) that still England lacked a
*mythology* that could hint at and share in the truths of reality while
being itself unreal. At the least, he needed the mythology for his own
joys, and gladly he shared it with the rest of us. That he did so in the
form of a novel, with characters to whom all of us can relate, meant
that it was a mythology we could *keep*, for it was a mythology
delivered in the form suitable to our day. For all its splendor,
<cite>The Silmarillion</cite> generally does not, and for the average
person cannot, engender the same sort of yearning that <cite>The Lord of
the Rings</cite> does. It is too remote. But its presence behind
<cite>The Lord of the Rings</cite> is what makes the latter work so
powerfully.

There will, I think, never be another Tolkien. He filled the gap that he
perceived, and so there is no need for another to come and fill it.
<cite>The Lord of the Rings</cite> will never be displaced; it is one of
the great epics, not only for Tolkien's day or our own, but for all.
